--------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/Axel_Springer_threatens_to_take_investment_out_of_Germany.txt

Axel Springer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/axel-springer>, the German 
publishing group, yesterday threatened to walk away and invest overseas after 
the country's media watchdog blocked its agreed €2.5bn (£1.7bn) takeover of 
ProSiebenSat.1, Germany's biggest commercial broadcaster.

KEK, the media regulator, said the merged entity would have too much sway over 
public opinion - equivalent to 42% of the German audience. It said Springer and 
its target had rejected the idea of selling off one of the two main TV channels.

Its decision, reached after talks with both companies yesterday, is expected 
to be confirmed by Germany's federal cartel office next week and could pave the 
way for Springer to expand abroad.

The group held out the dim prospect of appealing over the heads of the 
regulators to regional authorities controlling broadcasting or to the economics 
minister, Michael Glos. It has until tomorrow to persuade the cartel office.

Springer said it was exploring "other options". Thwarted in its attempt to buy 
the Telegraph newspapers in Britain, it has been cited as a would-be suitor for 
Trinity Mirror, publishers of the Daily Mirror and regional titles, and is keen 
to grow outside the tightly-regulated German market.

It has been desperately seeking a way out of the impasse posed by regulators 
over its planned takeover of ProSieben, controlled by US media investor Haim 
Saban, and agreed the €2.5bn bid last August. It aims to challenge Bertelsmann, 
which controls RTL and Channel 5.

Rejecting proposals to sell either ProSieben or Sat.1, it is understood to 
have tried to allay fears about its over-dominance or the creation of a near 
duopoly inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> by seeking a 
partner. TF1 of France, which once tried to buy ProSieben, and Luxembourg-based 
SBS, co-owned by private equity groups Permira and KKR, are said to have held 
talks.

Springer offered to sell some of its TV magazines and ensure its newspaper and 
TV businesses were kept at arm's length of each other, but the group, which 
publishes the conservative daily Die Welt, turned down a proposal to sell off 
Bild, Germany's biggest-selling daily tabloid.

Mathias Döpfner, Springer's chief executive, yesterday lambasted regulators 
for imposing impossible conditions out of outdated misconceptions about the 
modern, global media landscape. "What they've overlooked is a global shift in 
media competition into digital distribution markets - as though that were some 
kind of delusion of new economy yuppies gone wild. This opinion is not only 
false, it's negligent." He poured scorn on the notion that Springer, a seventh 
of the size of Bertelsmann, could form an equally powerful half of a duopoly 
squeezing out competition.

Mr Döpfner added that even the most comprehensive disposal proposals to 
address its concerns were turned down by KEK within hours of being handed in. 
"One has almost the impression that even if we were to propose selling off the 
entire Axel Springer publishing house they would nevertheless forbid us to take 
over the TV broadcasters," he said.

He accused the watchdog of dreaming up new models for assessing market share 
by adding together print and TV market shares, and of putting forward plans for 
a new oversight body that "would make the GDR [communist East Germany] appear 
like a liberal economic paradise."

Springer's increasingly desperate search for a way out of the impasse, reports 
said, is partly occasioned by an agreement with Mr Saban and his co-investors 
in ProSieben to pay daily interest up to €50m if the deal is delayed. But the 
US investor could decide instead to seek another buyer, especially as ProSieben 
shares have been rising dramatically.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/Budget__conserve_our_culture.txt

Michael Lynch, standing down as chief executive of the Southbank Centre, 
criticised "corporate Britain" for what he saw as its failure to support the 
arts in general, and theFestival Hall refurbishment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artblog/2007/jun/07/royalfestivalhallhits111m>
 in particular.

I admire Lynch for being a breath of fresh air, and what he has done for us in 
sorting out the Royal Festival Hall – rediscovering the spirit of that 
wonderful venue – is immense. The 50,000 people who experienced theSímon 
Bolívar Youth Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/apr/19/simon-bolivar-youth-orchestra> 
last week would agree. Getting sponsorship was a tough job, but he did it, 
including from about 20,000 individual donors.

Now is not the time for negativity. In the last few years commercial 
sponsorship has been important for the arts in this country – more than £160m 
in 2007-08. And now, in the jaws of global recession and on the brink of a 
budget that may set the tone for arts funding in this country for years to 
come, public and private funders of the arts need to stand firm and stand 
together.

In England we have a six-key model for funding the arts – public funding; 
through the Arts Council and local government; private funding; through 
commercial sponsorship; foundations and individual giving; and through the box 
office.

When things are going well, this model has plenty of advantages, which we 
should draw more effectively to the attention of those who hold the purse 
strings. Relatively small amounts of public money attract private money, and 
allow more to be done for the public money that is available. It's not the 
chimera of pyramid selling, it's core public investment levering in more real 
money from elsewhere.

In hard times it is vital that all elements of the funding package stay as 
strong as possible. It's important that public and private funding remains 
strong and it's important to keep box office going by providing something the 
public want.

And what do the public want? They want to be entertained, sure, but they also 
want to be challenged, offered insights, invited to question the world as they 
have understood it until now. It's more than bread and circuses; it is 
nourishment for the soul as former certainties begin to crumble.

Boards of arts organisations – many of whom might in their day jobs work in 
the financial sector – may well be feeling like pulling back on artistic risk, 
programming the supposedly safe. But within the safe lies the prospect of 
boredom. Artistic leaders know that the public remain eager to experience 
something less ordinary, and want artists to take properly thought through and 
executed artistic risk. It's not like gambling on toxic debt, it's the way the 
arts work – risk moves boundaries and takes audiences to places they did not 
know existed.

We should trust our artists to do what they do best – challenge, thrill, 
surprise and offer us the comfort of hard won insight into our condition. And 
funders should support them in this.

We know what can go wrong if more than one pillar of the funding structure is 
shaken at the same time. In previous recessions not only has private money been 
scarce but public funding was cut too. This led to a spiral of decline where in 
some cases programming became more conservative and the public, rightly, lost 
interest. We mustn't let this happen to the arts this time.

What we ask of private funders is courage – we understand that you are under 
pressure but we know you see the value of your investment in the arts. Have the 
courage to continue it.

What we ask of politicians is faith – in the arts and what they can do, and 
for the important pillar of public funding to remain strong as a key part of 
the way through for the nation and its soul.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/Cath_Kidston_s_florals_are_a_hit_with_Asian_market_as_sales_boom.txt

Cath Kidston's floral-print handbags and homeware have proved such a big hit 
with Asian customers the retailer now has more overseas stores than British 
ones for the first time.

Booming sales in China, Japan, Thailand and Korea helped the designer reach 
annual sales of more than £100m for the first time since it was founded in 
1993. International sales soared by more than 50%. The retailer's chief 
executive, Kenny Wilson, said: "The products we sell are universal in their 
appeal. In Shanghai, for example, there are a lot of bright printed products, 
so we fit in really well. Customers get the quirky Britishness and sense of 
humour of the brand.

"Obviously, there are some products that are focused for individual markets, 
such as the bento lunchbox which sells really well in Japan, but overall all 
categories have seen growth."

Handbags have sold particularly well and some of the floral prints have been 
used for 20 years, he added.

The group now has 58 stores in the UK and 60 across China, Spain, Thailand and 
South Korea, with a new flagship store opening in Shanghai as well as the first 
major UK shop on London's Piccadilly, due to open in December.

Underlying profits were up 13% to £21m for the year to end of March after 33 
new stores were opened, including eight new UK stores, where sales were up 21%.

Worldwide network sales, which include wholesale to retailers, increased by 
24% to £129m.

Wilson said the reason for the success was the cheerfulness of the brand and 
its popularity with women.

"One in four women owns something from Cath Kidston today and we've got a very 
loyal customer base. We obviously want those people to keep buying from us, but 
we also know there are still three out of four women who haven't shopped with 
us," Wilson said.The company was founded by designer Cath Kidston as a shop 
selling vintage fabrics. Kidston sold a 60% stake to a private equity firm, TA 
Associates, in 2010, but she still holds a 23% stake and sits on the board as 
creative director.

As part of the company's 20th-annivesary celebrations it had a summer house at 
the Chelsea Flower Show in May.

Wilson said "[Kidston] is still intrinsically involved in the direction of the 
company and although she doesn't design everything any more, she still decides 
on everything we sell.

"Since I joined the business we have clear distinct roles: mine is to grow the 
business and hers is to be the creative. We are mutually respectful of what we 
both bring to the party."

As well as adorning everything from oven gloves to lampshades, the brand has 
also collaborated to decorate Roberts radios and design floral Millets tents.

Most private equity companies have a short-term strategy to exit businesses 
after a few years, but Wilson said TA were very supportive and were in the 
business for the long term.

"They recognise that this is a growing business and that we want to reinvest 
the profits to grow the business."

Plans for further overseas growth will focus on Asia, but Wilson did not rule 
out looking at markets including the US and, while the UK venture has been 
successful, he wants to avoid overexposure.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/Desert_hockey_is_dead__so_will_Coyotes_move_to_Quebec__Seattle_or_Portland_.txt

Is it finally time to (finally) leave Phoenix (finally)?

The dream of desert hockey might finally be dead. Greg Jamison, the man trying 
to keep the Coyotes in Phoenix was able to guarantee a $300-odd million, 
20-year lease with the city of Glendale, if he could agree to buy the team by 
last Thursday.He missed that deadline 
<http://www.cbc.ca/sports/hockey/nhl/story/2013/01/30/sp-nhl-greg-jamison-phoenix-coyotes-bid-falls-apart.html>
. So now, as we have time and time again over the last few years, we will 
discuss What's To Be Done With The Phoenix Coyotes.

The general feeling seems to now be to cut the cord entirely, move the team to 
another city, chalk the whole thing up as one big, giant (sort of) loss, and 
one day look back fondly onthe days of the White Out 
<http://coyotes.nhl.com/club/news.htm?id=627442> and Jeremy Roenick wearing 
that hideous jersey 
<http://cdn.bleacherreport.net/images_root/slides/photos/001/286/584/72481489_display_image.jpg?1315840097>
 (though we will not look back fondly at the jersey itself). At least one of 
the reasons everyone seems to think it's just time to pack it in is that the 
city doesn't even seem willing to extend the same deal it was to give Jamison 
to anyone else, even if anyone else was interested. There are other things to 
worry about, after all.

From the Arizona Republic 
<http://www.azcentral.com/community/glendale/articles/20130201sale-effortscontinuefor-coyotes.html?nclick_check=1>
:

[Glendale city Mayor, Jerry] Weiers, who was sworn in last month along with 
three other City Council members, said the deal was too costly for the city 
that is considering layoffs of police, fire and other employees.

"When someone calls 911, they don't want a Zamboni to show up; they want a 
firetruck or a police car to show up," he said.

OK, well arguably, that depends on what kind of emergency they're having, but 
Weiers' point is duly noted. Things like police and firefighters cost a lot of 
money, and when times are tight it's difficult to justify – especially as a new 
legislator – pouring copious vats of cash straight into a financially cratering 
hockey franchise.

All of which means the questions are again coming in about where the team 
would (will) go when the time is right.On CBC over the weekend 
<http://www.cbc.ca/player/Sports/CBC%27s+Hockey+Night+in+Canada/Hotstove/ID/2331657620/>
, Elliotte Friedman (whopoints out in a column here 
<http://www.cbc.ca/sports/hockey/opinion/2013/02/keeping-coyotes-in-phoenix-is-proving-tough-sell.html>
 that there are only nine events scheduled for all of 2013 at Glendale's 
Jobing.com Arena), was adamant that the team will not end up in the Toronto 
area. Yet. "If, and I stress if, this team has to move... to Canada, it's not 
going to Toronto next year," Friedman said. "There will not be a second team in 
Toronto next year, I'm hearing. And if it has to go to Canada, that is, there's 
only one more place it could go."

That place is Quebec City, which is in the process of a $7 million renovation 
of a rather large arena that, by virtue of being the home rink for the QMJHL's 
Quebec Ramparts, seems just about perfectly designed for anNHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> team.

But Quebec City is not the only name on the list of potential homes for the 
Coyotes. Seattle, also potentially the next home of the Sacramento Kings, is a 
possible spot. That's certainlythe speculation from Forbes.com 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/mikeozanian/2013/01/31/bet-on-coyotes-moving-to-seattle-as-sale-to-jamison-falls-apart/>
, anyway, where Mike Ozanian tells us that two sports teams occupying a new 
arena in Seattle is "better economics" than just one. Butover at the Seattle 
Times, Geoff Baker disputes 
<http://seattletimes.com/html/hockey/2020268888_hockey04.html> the idea for two 
reasons: First, that NBA sale would have to go through, and second, Quebec City 
is just better equipped.

"It's doubtful the NHL would give the go-ahead for the Coyotes to relocate to 
Seattle without assurances that an NBA team is, in fact, coming and that 
construction on the new arena can begin...the 15,177-seat (for hockey) KeyArena 
has never been used for NHL games and hasn't played host to hockey of any kind 
since the WHL Thunderbirds left after 2009. That's an obstacle that could be 
overcome, but the reality is, there still is not any firmly established 
ownership group in Seattle that appears ready to take over a hockey team right 
away."

Indeed. 

But could there be another option in the Pacific Northwest? Maybe. Last week, 
as the Phoenix deal fell through,the Toronto Sun reported 
<http://www.torontosun.com/2013/02/02/nhl-notes-portland-poised-for-nhl-bid> 
that Bill Gallacher, owner of the WHL's Portland Winter Hawks, might be 
interested in bringing the team there and setting them up at the Rose Garden 
Arena, currently home to the NBA's Portland Trail Blazers and which can seat 
just over 18,000 for a hockey game – not to mention owned by billionaire 
Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen who came close to grabbing the Penguins when 
things were looking rough in Pittsburgh a few years ago. Gallacher – man ofa 
massive corporate resume 
<http://investing.businessweek.com/research/stocks/people/person.asp?personId=4816547&ticker=AVF:CN>
 – was also for a time rumoured to be part of the bid Jamison was assembling in 
Phoenix. So, is this for real? It sounds real enough. But then again, in the 
ongoing saga of the Phoenix Coyotes, everything sounds real enough – 
particularly money.At the Orgenonian (or OregonLive.com) 
<http://www.oregonlive.com/hawks/index.ssf/2013/02/nhl_and_portland_the_old_story.html>
, the whole thing is deemed totally bunk for one simple fact: Allen has a 
"longstanding view that bringing in another professional team that would 
compete for dollars with his basketball team makes no sense." Yes, good point. 
Nobody from Microsoft has ever made a poor competitive decision.

Any of these cities would probably prove to be a more lucrative spot for an 
NHL franchise in the long run than Phoenix really ever had the chance of being. 
They could even relocate and get expansion money too,Ken Campbell at the Hockey 
News says 
<http://www.thehockeynews.com/articles/49824-How-the-NHL-can-relocate-the-Coyotes-and-get-its-expansion-money-too.html>
. It's unlikely that Commissioner Gary Bettman would very seriously enjoy 
moving another franchise to Canada, rather than somewhere else in the U.S. 
based on potential TV revenue alone, but there's a guaranteed market in Quebec. 
You can't beat that. It's – what's the phrase? – good economics.

A bit of mayhem in Anaheim

In this video <http://youtu.be/L8rSixlAIGI>, you'll see Jordan Nolan and Bryan 
Allen fight, but what's more important is what happens in the background (and 
that eventually becomes the focus of the clip):
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FL8rSixlAIGI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FL8rSixlAIGI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FL8rSixlAIGI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
As you can see way off behind the fight, L.A. Kings forward Jarret Stoll rams 
Cam Fowler's head into the glass/boards in the corner as they both challenge 
for the puck. Stoll got away with the whole thing cleanly, despite it being 
very, very obvious in the replay exactly what kind of horsecollar he gave 
Fowler. On Monday, the Ducks announced Fowler would miss a game with – get this 
– a head injury!

Should Stoll have been suspended? Where's Brendan Shanahan? (See below.) 

John Erskine's elbow vs. Wayne Simmonds' head

This is where Shanahan was, apparently – evaluating a brutal hit from 
Washington's John Erskine on Philadelphia's Wayne Simmonds 
<http://youtu.be/C7Gjy61B9m4> during last Friday's game in DC. As they both go 
for the puck near the blue line, Erskine looks up and, noticing he'll lose the 
race, raises his elbow directly into Simmonds' head. There was no call on the 
play at the time.

Simmonds will be gone indefinitely after suffering a concussion on the play. 
On review, Erskine got three games for the move, explained in painful montone 
by Shanahan's robot voice here.

Should it have been more?

Time for a shakeup in Calgary?

Short answer: God, yes. Even before the Flames threw away probably their most 
promising game of the season Saturday night, the Hockey News was already 
speculating that it's probably time for some changes in Calgary – a lot of 
them, even. For those of you that missed it, the Flames held Chicago at bay, 
outplaying the Hawks for most of Saturday night's game. Tied 1-1 with about 34 
seconds left to go in the third, the Flames jumped ahead. Spectacularly. 
Unexpectedly. Deservedly. And then... Patrick Kane scored with three seconds 
left in regulation to tie it 2-2. The Flames lost in the ensuing shootout.

All of this played into Adam Proteau's lengthy lament 
<http://www.thehockeynews.com/articles/49734-Calgary-Flames-rebuild-long-overdue.html>
 stating the obvious: Calgary has done little to shake things up in years, and 
the result is a bottom-feeding club destined for more of the same.

"There is really no choice for the Flames anymore. Iginla can be an 
unrestricted free agent this summer. Kiprusoff will gain his freedom a year 
after that," Proteau writes. "Off-season additions Jiri Hudler and Dennis 
Wideman aren't making a measurable difference. Meanwhile, their scouting and 
development staff has not provided the Flames with enough up-and-coming young 
talent to offset their fading collection of veterans."

Sad, but true. The problems (as he goes on to note) are more numerous than 
that. One he mostly leaves out is the fact that behind Kiprusoff, there is 
nobody. Calgary has gone years without developing a decent backup goalie, and 
when the time comes to replace Kipper, the only choice will be to buy, rather 
than look internally for new talent. That won't come cheap. Time to start 
selling.

Goals of the week
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/How_Detour_is_helping_fans_get_their_favourite_bands_to_town.txt

Ever fancied putting on gigs? Not to do the hard work – not negotiating the 
contracts, or booking the venue, or sorting out the PA and desk and backline, 
or making sure it's advertised in the right places, or getting everyone paid 
the right sum of money – but just to do the fun bit, the bit where you say "I 
want to see that band" and then you wait for it to happen?

Last week, music fans in 10 UK cities – Birmingham, Brighton, Bristol, 
Cardiff, Coventry, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Manchester, Nottingham and Sheffield – 
came a little closer to that dream, whenSongkick <http://www.songkick.com/>'s 
Detour <https://detour.songkick.com/metro_areas/24426/discover> service 
expanded beyond its London base for the time.

What Detour does is encourage fans to "pledge" a cash sum towards getting a 
band to visit their town. Detour then takes those pledges to the band's 
management and promoters, suggesting there is a market for their group in that 
town. If the band comes, the pledgers get a ticket – and a refund on any excess 
they have pledged, or a request they make the difference up if their pledge was 
below the ticket price – and Detour gets a cut of the tickets it has been 
responsible for selling.

"It's designed to work within the way things are now," says Ian Hogarth of 
Songkick, one of the brains behind Detour. "The first thing we did was with
Desaparecidos <http://www.desaparecidosband.com/> [one of Conor Oberst's 
projects]. About 100 people pledged, and we reached out to management, the 
promoter and the booking agent. Management told us they wanted to come, but the 
offers they were getting weren't enough." With the guarantee of 100 pledges – 
Hogarth estimates that total ticket sales for a show will be around 10 to 20 
times the number of pledges – they were able to go ahead and book the show.

For promoters, the incentive to adopt Detour lies in the way it can help 
minimise the risk involved in putting on a show. "It's a mechanism whereby 
people can directly express what they're interested in going to see," says 
Anton Lockwood of the promoterDHP 
<http://www.thisisnottingham.co.uk/Setting-course-stars/story-17827755-detail/story.html#axzz2YBICP1l3>
, which has partnered with Songkick. "It provides way more information and a 
mechanism that's never been there before. It won't take the risk out of 
promoting, but in a complex and competitive market – which is getting more 
competitive – it gives us another mechanism."

Lockwood believes it could be an ideal tool in booking comeback tours, where 
no one really knows whether an act who's been away for 20 years will sell 500 
tickets or 5,000 tickets, or for assessing the actual popularity of buzz bands. 
"Every promoter I know, including me, has had that experience of thinking: 
'Everyone I know loves this band – I'll put them on,' and then finding the 
crowd is just those people you already know."

Barry Hogan of All Tomorrow's Parties <http://www.atpfestival.com/home.php> 
discovered how Detour could help him calibrate the size of his promotions when 
ATP and Detour partnered to put on Goat last month. "There were 200 pledges. 
Goat was originally planned for the Scala, but we could see we had enough 
pledges to go to the Electric Ballroom. Now it's opened up from London, I think 
it will spread like wildfire."

Not everyone is completely convinced. Hogarth admits there has been suspicion 
from booking agents. Because the service has been limited to London until now – 
with about 3,000 users – it's hard to find a lot of different experiences to 
cross-reference (an appeal on Twitter brought one industry person who spoke of 
having heard unfavourable things – but nothing more concrete than that). But 
the benefit of whatever doubt there is has to go, at this point, to Detour. Can 
it really be a bad thing to try to open up the gig-going experience, and to 
help promoters know when there really is a market for their band?

We'll leave the last word to Mark Gamble, a fan who made one of the pledges 
that helped bring Desaparecidos over. "You're funding the band directly," he 
says. "It's not a cheap process to tour, and with Detour you're giving the band 
a sense that it's a worthwhile thing. And you're pledging with a load of other 
people who really love the band – so you're getting them to the show, rather 
than the people who just want to talk through the gig."
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/How_we_made_kscope__an_image_sharing_app_for_university_applicants.txt

There we were at the planning table. We had recently built a brand campaign 
for Arts University Bournemouth (AUB <http://aub.ac.uk/>) on the theme of 
"looking at the world from different angles". As part of this, we ripped up the 
typical university prospectus format in favour of a pack of interlocking cards. 
We had an award-winning print publication on our hands, but next we needed to 
take the brand thinking into the digital realm.

The question was: how?

Great ideas and design comes from great relationships. When designers are able 
to build trust and rapport between themselves and a client, ideas can truly 
fly. For us, this was the case with AUB.


Bond and Coyne <http://www.bondandcoyne.co.uk/> (that's us) is a 
problem-solving agency. We don't work in any one particular media and we like 
to test ourselves. We're not digital specialists but we know what concepts we 
want to push digital to do.


Both of our directors have lectured in design for 12 years and this has meant 
that, as a business, we have an enviable network of around 2,000 new and 
not-so-new creative talents to draw upon should we need it. This has always 
given us confidence to take on the less familiar and to be fully ambitious 
about what we strive to achieve.

So, sat in the studio as a team of bleary-eyed designers in the aftermath of 
award winning glory, it was creative director Martin Coyne who said: "Okay, so 
how can we tangibly prove how creative AUB is?”

Initially we thought about orchestras and about the bringing together of 
sounds to create something beautiful – much like the courses at the university 
coming together to provide a creative education. It could have been a 
sound-based app but it needed to be visual. Also, we felt strongly that the 
university shouldn’tsay it was creative; it should show that it was.


With a deep breath, we stepped into the unknown and began to build our first 
fully-fledged app. Pulling together a team of interested and ambitious 
designers and programmers, our aim was to take the idea of "looking at the 
world from different angles" into a digital form.


It was imperative that we did this in a way that would capture the attention 
and imagination of a young creative audience. As lecturers, we often see 
students stare out the window and we wanted to see how technology could harness 
that curiosity and turn it into something that would engage them in a creative 
process.

We created kscope <http://www.bondandcoyne.co.uk/kscope.html>, an app that 
turns a smartphone or tablet into a kaleidoscope using the device's camera and 
video functions. You can choose different filters and there is a sliding scale 
to increase or decrease the level of fracturing. Users are able to take kscope 
photos or films and then share these online within kscope galleries.

We did take a risk in launching an app that allows young, creative, 
inquisitive people to share imagery online. We had to trust them to resist the 
urge to look at certain body parts from different angles. We actually only had 
one near-panic when a flesh-coloured image was uploaded. Fortunately, it was an 
elbow.

The app was selected by Apple as a best new app and featured on the iTunes 
homepage. It was downloaded over 21,000 times in its first week and kscope 
images and films have been uploaded from around the globe (all of which can be 
seen on aninteractive world map <http://kscope.aub.ac.uk/>). 

The kaleidoscope element itself was not in our opinion the most innovative 
part of the app, it was the fact that the brand itself was going to be stepping 
back from selling. It has been nominated for an innovation award in education 
marketing and continues to feature in exhibition stands and international 
recruitment campaigns. Most importantly, our work with AUB has helped to 
increase the application rate to the university by over 11%.

The moral of our story? Build great rapport with clients and seek those that 
will be excited by what you do and vice versa; they will trust your instincts 
and you will share the rewards. Have the tenacity to see something through and 
welcome collaborators to help you grow the concept beyond what you can imagine 
alone. Finally, retain your belief in the mantra that "concept is king" and its 
applications will follow.

Mike Bond is strategic director at Bond and Coyne 
<http://www.bondandcoyne.co.uk/> 

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/How_we_made_the_Hansel___Gretel_Newsstand_app_for_iPad.txt

The idea to produce a digital programme came about as part of a larger 
campaign for our autumn season tour in 2012, for which we tested a 
majority-digital approach to marketing. It felt only right that if we were 
cutting down on paper (by 80%) we shouldn't be producing a paper-based souvenir 
programme.

Without the budget or the skills in-house to achieve what we wanted, we sought 
and obtained funding, which in turn led to a collaboration with theUniversity 
of Strathclyde <https://www.strath.ac.uk/cis/> and the creation of a HTML 
version of the programme.

It was well received by our audience, and while our original plan was to take 
the HTML version, manage the content in-house and develop new digital 
programmes for each production thereafter, we found it had limitations and 
reallywhat we wanted was an app <http:>.

We spent the next few months finding the money, but also refining precisely 
what the app would do. We discussed the need for it to be flexible while not 
costing the earth, but also for it to be something we might sell to other arts 
organisations who have similar requirements and might benefit from a simple, 
effective and tailor-made product.

Knowing the appetite of our audience for what goes on behind the stage curtain 
– the planning, costumes, sets, design, music, choreography and dancers – the 
ambition was to create an app that provided an insight into the making of a 
ballet and to give behind the scenes access

The brief was to develop an app that could:

• Be a sales tool for forthcoming shows by linking immediately to online 
tickets
• Be insightful but not repeat content that was already online 
• Offer alternative content from the printed souvenir programmes (which 
audiences cherish)
• Be easy to update with new information as a tour progressed (eg new 
photographs)
• Automatically refresh new content / notify those who have already downloaded 
the app
• Be an app that audiences want to share with friends via social media 
• Notify audiences there is a new issue available and hence a new show coming 
(forward selling)

We partnered with Dog Digital <http://www.dogdigital.com/>, who helped us find 
the solution – aNewsstand app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/genre/ios-newsstand/id6021?mt=8> for iPad. The 
notification of a new issue was critical to the long-term use of the app and 
the opportunity to be a valuable sales tool for us and other organisations.

We ruled out a phone version due to three factors. The first was that our 
audience access stats indicated a higher proportion of iPad users on our 
website. The second (and most important) factor was cost; creating an app for 
both iPhone and iPad wasn't an option. Finally, our beautiful ballet production 
images are best viewed on a larger screen.

We expected the app might be a bit of a slow burn and we didn't have any 
budget left after the build to heavily promote it. We launched it to those most 
engaged with the company via our e-newsletter database and expected that social 
media interest would weave its magic. We've not been disappointed so far.

Content has been a challenge, primarily as we were creating the app for a 
brand new production with no photography in existence. Fortunately, our poster 
image for the show lent itself to creating beautiful pages with intertwining 
forest and sweet themes. We used a mixture of rehearsal images and costume 
fittings before adding a further gallery of production shots during the week of 
opening, a result (and benefit) of being able to add and remove pages with 
in-house access to the back-end.

We also created short films based on the interviews that were being conducted 
for the souvenir programme articles. They served as teaser film versions of the 
printed articles, giving snippets that encourage readers to also buy the 
souvenir programme at the performance for a full version.

In terms of future shows, the app has given us a framework that we can 
customise with page length choices and text placement options, combined with 
images, films or galleries, zoom functions, share functions and audio excerpts.

In the first issue we opted to restrict the advertising pages to Scottish 
Ballet's own products – merchandise, memberships and so on. For the next app, 
the advertising opportunities will be developed to provide an income stream now 
that we have user stats for the first edition.

Why was the app free? The app is a means for us to share what goes on here at 
ScottishBallet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> with our most loyal 
audiences and, to be honest, we were a little concerned that charging a 
fee-to-access insight into what we do would be counterproductive. However, we 
do hope this app makes them feel inspired to book tickets and keep supporting 
us.

Kirsten Cockburn is head of marketing and corporate sponsorship at Scottish 
Ballet <http://www.scottishballet.co.uk/> – follow the company on Twitter 
@scottishballet <https://twitter.com/scottishballet>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/Jurassic_World_and_the__legacyquel___2015_global_box_office_in_review.txt

The winner

Short of the freak deletion of every single print in cinemas and on Disney 
hard drives and pirate servers, The Force Awakens will ultimately wind up the 
highest grossing film worldwide released in 2015. For now, Jurassic World – 
with $1.67bn (£1.12bn) –still holds that honour 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2015>. And given 
that, unlike Star Wars, its chart-topping feats came as a total shock, it’s the 
more interesting case study. The teaser, shrinking a great white shark to dino 
snack proportions, was anifty amuse-bouche 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EqpxM3GkaDo>, but there wasn’t much early heat 
for a fourth instalment of Jurassic Park that looked to be adhering firmly to 
the modern franchise behavioural template. Except, financially, it didn’t. 
Analysts predicted a debut weekend between $115-135m, butit confounded with a 
record-breaking $208.8m 
<http://deadline.com/2015/06/jurassic-world-all-time-box-office-opening-record-tracking-social-media-1201443293/>
. The muscular US takings – $652.3m, the third highest film ever – were stellar 
from a country that often cools on rote sequels; they coupled with the expected 
explosion in overseas grosses to produce the third highest global performer, 
too.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
No one had anticipated how comprehensively nostalgia, worked integrally into 
the blockbuster format, could max out interest across multiple generations. 
Jurassic World, in a phenomenon some are now calling the “legacyquel 
<http://screencrush.com/the-age-of-legacyquels/>” or the “legacy franchise”, 
incorporatednod after nod to its 1993 progenitor 
<http://www.slashfilm.com/jurassic-park-references-in-jurassic-world/> – and 
(see below) was far from the only one in that game in 2015. Beyond that, the 
Universal film was simply the most mainstream beast on the prowl in the summer, 
a straightforward four-quadrant rampage with none of the superhero film’s 
complicating urges to please fanboys, be “dark”, or play into an extended 
universe. Colin Trevorrow’s execution might have lacked Steven Spielberg’s 
finesse, but the film’s blindsiding success spoke volumes about nostalgia for 
the old-timey, all-embracing summer blockbuster (the year’s other major success 
stories, Furious 7, Avengers: Age of Ultron and The Force Awakens having gone 
out either earlier or later).


The best films of 2015 in the UK: the full list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ng-interactive/2015/dec/04/best-films-of-2015-uk>
The recovery

Hollywood was wringing its hands in 2014, with US box office dropping 5% to 
$10.4bn. With this year’s total clocking at time of writing to $10.9bn, and The 
Force Awakenssailing past $1bn in record time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/27/star-wars-the-force-awakens-box-office-record>
, it looks like the$11bn barrier will be breached 
<http://www.screendaily.com/box-office/2015-to-cross-11bn-box-office/5098408.article>
 at last. Particularly with inflation factored in, this doesn’t scotch the 
picture of long-term stagnancy at the North American box office. But it’s still 
a shot in the arm in the face of a fast-encroaching Chinese market that should 
surpass the US by the end of 2017. But 12 months that have produced two highest 
US debuts (Jurassic World, $208.8m; The Force Awakens, $248m), an unprecedented 
five $1bn worldwide grossers (Jurassic World, Furious 7, Age of Ultron, Minions 
and The Force Awakens), and unprecedentednear-$7bn 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/box-office/box-office-has-record-year-as-few-share-the-wealth-1201668037/>
 global haul for high-flying Universal will reassure the studios about their 
agenda-setting capabilities.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fjurassic-world-star-wars-furious7-avengers-age-of-ultron-minions-2015-global-box-office-in-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F620ed0bd536714eb17f737f551074c4b0d3b29b4%2F0_401_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jurassic%20World%20and%20the%20'legacyquel'%3A%202015%20global%20box%20office%20in%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fjurassic-world-star-wars-furious7-avengers-age-of-ultron-minions-2015-global-box-office-in-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jurassic%20World%20and%20the%20%27legacyquel%27%3A%202015%20global%20box%20office%20in%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fjurassic-world-star-wars-furious7-avengers-age-of-ultron-minions-2015-global-box-office-in-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F620ed0bd536714eb17f737f551074c4b0d3b29b4%2F0_401_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Adam Driver and cronies in The Force Awakens. Photograph: 
Allstar/Disney/Lucasfilm 
With nervy industry prostration before these towering peaks and even more 
nervy self-flagellation over several flat box-office weekends during the 
summer, the secret of consistent growth seems to still elude Hollywood. The 
2015 worldwide chart climbed higher, but it also plummeted lower – into the 
$500m range, untouched in the top 10 since 2011. Part of the problem is because 
the landscape remains so tightly franchise-paved that introducing new material 
is not getting any easier. There isn’t quite the total dearth of originality 
some would have you believe – six top 20 films (Inside Out, The Martian, Fifty 
Shades of Grey, San Andreas, Kingsman, Home) were drawn from material new to 
cinema, same as in 2014. But mostly featuring outside the top 10, they are 
innately disadvantaged by the preawareness racket that killed Warner – who 
seriously struggled while waiting forthe DC extended universe 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DC_Extended_Universe> to take over from Harry 
Potter – this year. For every Inside Out breakthrough, there is a Jupiter 
Ascending, Chappie or Crimson Peak casualty. More viable newcomers, however, 
would help smooth over some of the troughs between mega-hits. Same for 
economics as with its plotting: Hollywood always did prefer the rollercoaster 
ride.


Industrialised nostalgia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fjurassic-world-star-wars-furious7-avengers-age-of-ultron-minions-2015-global-box-office-in-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd682b9d3c9fb34140325ec7d854d23e4bbb40b0%2F0_174_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jurassic%20World%20and%20the%20'legacyquel'%3A%202015%20global%20box%20office%20in%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fjurassic-world-star-wars-furious7-avengers-age-of-ultron-minions-2015-global-box-office-in-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jurassic%20World%20and%20the%20%27legacyquel%27%3A%202015%20global%20box%20office%20in%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fjurassic-world-star-wars-furious7-avengers-age-of-ultron-minions-2015-global-box-office-in-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd682b9d3c9fb34140325ec7d854d23e4bbb40b0%2F0_174_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
 Nostalgia has become enshrined as a law of dramatics … Arnold Schwarzenegger 
in Terminator Genisys. Photograph: Melinda Sue Gordon/AP 
So, back to the legacy franchise. It’s impossible not to read this trend as 
the evolution of nostalgia-steeped 21st-century culture that, in cinema, has 
already landed umpteen remakes on our door. But where the early-noughties-style 
“update” now looks heavy-handed – see The Man from UNCLE – Hollywood now treads 
softer and more insidiously. The new legacy franchise starts, as with the boys 
stumbling on the climactic 1993 atrium inJurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world> or Spectre’s resurrection of 
Blofeld, by referencing its own iconic moments and characters in a way that 
goes beyond a bit of cheeky homage. The Force Awakens and Terminator Genisys, 
though, went even further: their heritage grabs were woven, almost 
scene-by-scene and beat-by-beat in places, into the deep fabric of their 
screenplays. Nostalgia isn’t merely a business MO now; since perhaps JJ 
Abrams’s Star Trek revival, it’s become enshrined as a law of dramatics, 
franchises embroidering previously laid plotlines to self-reinforcing effect. 
Even Furious 7, halted for a moment by Paul Walker’s death and obliged to look 
back in memoriam, seemed slightly mesmerised by its own reflection. How aware 
Han Solo or Sarah Connor or 007 – given alibis of differing plausibility in 
their respective franchises – are of the weird repetitive vibe around them is 
by the by. What’s important is that this high-strength nostalgia, regurgitating 
cultural memories for the audience, is selling. Arguably, it’s another means by 
which Hollywood is switching – along with the “extended universe” – to 
infinitely renewable franchises that burrow ceaselessly into their own 
mythology. Disappointing returns for The Hunger Games – Mockingjay, Part 2 
($616.8m to date, a series low) are a blow to those who believed finite 
franchises with a fixed end point invariably boosted takings as they bowed out.

Black America goes mainstream
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fstraight-outta-compton-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440693836888%2FKP_405317_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Straight%20Outta%20Compton%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fstraight-outta-compton-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Straight%20Outta%20Compton%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fstraight-outta-compton-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440693836888%2FKP_405317_crop_640x360.jpg>
This year’s representation wars saw that unshakeable big bad, the white 
patriarchal order, under heavy fire: sustained attacks on multiple fronts on
Hollywood’s treatment of women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/25/rose-mcgowan-i-was-fired-for-flagging-adam-sandler-casting-call-sexism>
; the feeling of a Brokeback Mountain-type normalisation, post-Caitlyn Jenner, 
for transsexual narratives with Sean Baker’s Tangerine and Tom Hooper’s The 
Danish Girl; more heat for blackface-style casting in the ancient Nile delta on 
both Exodus andGods of Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/13/gods-of-egypt-posters-anger-whitewashed-cast-twitter-exodus>
. But the one area where these struggles translated into proper box office was 
with black America – long ghettoised away from the wider mainstream with the 
Kevin Hart-Damon Wayans-Tyler Perry brigade. Home, featuring CGI animation’s 
first black lead character, made $386m for Fox in spring, the 18th most 
successful movie of the year. Universal’s NWA biopic Straight Outta Compton was 
an effortless breakout hit in the summer, scooping $161.2m in the US, and Creed 
– another legacyquel, dancing like a butterfly around Rocky – has managed just 
over half of that to date. The latter two, especially, are deeply rooted in a 
specifically urban US context and have done business accordingly – rather than 
the vaguely ethnicised carnival of the Fast & Furious franchise that is 
designed to make bucks across borders. But in terms of underrepresented 
viewpoints getting their due, they are exactly where everyone wants to be: in 
the spotlight, with no one making a fuss about it, getting paid.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFbhsvxqoCG4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFbhsvxqoCG4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFbhsvxqoCG4&media=>
Chinese blockbusters v2.0


Bad news for Hollywood way out east in 2015: China film-makers wrested back 
control of the market, with a local-film share bordering on 60%. That is partly 
due to helpful state protectionism, in the shape of the foreign film quota and 
the periodic blackout on Hollywood releases. What’s also noticeable is how 
China’s homegrown blockbusters are becoming increasingly sharp. They’re 
ironising and splicing genres to win back the youth audience that,as we noted 
at the end of last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/31/transformers-4-2014-global-box-office-in-review>
, was losing patience with martial arts spectaculars likeRed Cliff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/12/film-review-red-cliff> and 
government-sponsored mega-productions. The fantasy filmMonster Hunt 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FbhsvxqoCG4> – a critter-infested romp through 
a medieval kingdom, with a Men in Black-like penchant for mischief – become the 
highest-grossing local film ever ($380m) and 2015’s best overall in the 
territory counted in local currency.Lost in Hong Kong 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=42gNEmpCeL0>, the second placed homegrowner 
($283.6m), raised Xu Zheng’s one-time indie comedies to full franchise stature. 
The meta-cinematic superhero parodyJian Bing Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vO3PR-RAht8> ($186.4m) showed more 
Hollywood-style conceptual suppleness, while tomb-raiding thrillersChronicles 
of the Ghostly Tribe <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SEmPPiNpXRQ> ($106.4m) and
Mojin: The Lost Legend <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5gUxp1_4Ce4> ($188.9m) 
boasted a more rowdy attitude to history than stodgy big budget lectures of the 
past. Even Jean-Jacques Annaud’s officially sanctioned epicWolf Totem 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=htggGbrX3qk> ($110.5m) was surprisingly 
progressive,venting about Cultural Revolution hypocrisies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=htggGbrX3qk>. Crushing form from Age of Ultron 
($240.1m), Jurassic World ($228.7m) and, especially, Furious 7 ($390.9m) gave 
Hollywood no shortage of encouragement in China – but this could be the first 
year they realised that the competition meant business.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3NQRhE772b0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3NQRhE772b0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3NQRhE772b0&media=>
The rest of the world

No signs, as yet, of any of the aforementioned Chinese multiplex-botherers 
breaking out internationally. But the day is coming. In the meantime, the view 
for anyone looking for a non-English language breakout is bleak – with 
noughties crossovers like Crouching Tiger, Amélie, Pan’s Labyrinth and The 
Orphanage looking more like historical timepieces with each year gone. God 
knows what theWeinsteins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/harvey-weinstein> 
did with the Anglo-Saxon distribution forSnowpiercer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/20/snowpiercer-first-look-review-edinburgh-2014>
, the eccentric $87m South Korean blockbuster that was the biggest recent hope 
(for those who hope for such things). There’s surely a story waiting to be 
written there.


In the meantime, we’re left with the odd speciality interest title scraped out 
over enough sufficient territories to start looking significant (Dragon Ball Z: 
Resurrection F 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/01/dragonball-z-resurrection-f-manga-animation>
, $61.8m), as well as the more prominent local genre films (South Korea’s 2015 
box-office champ, thechaebol <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaebol> thriller 
Veteran <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3HYI9-yJ76U>, $93m) and comedies. You 
can usually rely on the latter to approach $100m somewhere, but it seems the 
fractious global mood crept in, with only Germany’sFack Ju Göhte 2 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ueav4iE0gYI> – about a Hamburg petty criminal 
still lowering the tone at the Goethe-Institut – getting close with $70m. The 
usually reliable France’s best shot was comedy-dramaLa Famille Bélier 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tEgw97vpkDM>’s $55m for its tale of a talented 
teenager with deaf parents.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fjurassic-world-star-wars-furious7-avengers-age-of-ultron-minions-2015-global-box-office-in-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55651b664920f5637657261b02fc7043fd7a5e13%2F0_190_2834_1700%2F2834.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jurassic%20World%20and%20the%20'legacyquel'%3A%202015%20global%20box%20office%20in%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fjurassic-world-star-wars-furious7-avengers-age-of-ultron-minions-2015-global-box-office-in-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jurassic%20World%20and%20the%20%27legacyquel%27%3A%202015%20global%20box%20office%20in%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fjurassic-world-star-wars-furious7-avengers-age-of-ultron-minions-2015-global-box-office-in-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55651b664920f5637657261b02fc7043fd7a5e13%2F0_190_2834_1700%2F2834.jpg>
 French comedy-drama La Famille Bélier. Photograph: Allstar/Mars Distribution 
Globally, India – although still sending its diasporic catchment area into a 
frenzy and mostly ignoring everyone else – had a fine year. Technically a 2014 
release, Aamir Khan’s syncretic satirePK 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=82ZEDGPCkT8> became in early summer the first 
Bollywood title to break $100m, including a smart $19.3m from China, where the 
star has a committed following. Part one of the Telugu epicBaahubali 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3NQRhE772b0> – supposedly the most expensive 
Indian film ever – managed a perhaps still-yet more impressive $90m worldwide, 
though leonine Mills & Boon bruiser Prabhas snared the majority of it from the 
home crowd. Salman Khan, meanwhile, shrugged offa criminal conviction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/06/bollywood-star-salman-khan-found-guilty-over-hit-and-run-crash>
 and let his global appeal do the talking, storming to $93m for his Kashmiri 
tearjerkerBajrangi Bhaijaan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/19/bajrangi-bhaijaan-review-salman-khan-india-pakistan-movie>
. Attempts to water down Indian flava for western tastes – as withBrett 
Ratner’s “remix” of Kites in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/may/20/kites-brett-ratner-hrithik-roshan>
 – seems to have stopped for the time being, but imagine what these films could 
do with just a bit more effort. Something mad: like translating the titles.


One last word a propos of diversity outside of Hollywood in the mainstream: 
the most depressing sign is that so-called overseas box-office hotspots like 
Mexico, Russia and Brazil are producing virtually nothing that looks remotely 
like crossing over, few new populist directors of note like Alfonso Cuáron, 
Timur Bekmambetov or Fernando Meirelles, and pitiful market shares for local 
films. It’s as if, as with Kylo Ren, everyone’s become happy to lie back and 
think of the empire.


Top 20 global box office, 2015

1. Jurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/10/jurassic-world-review-chris-pratt-steven-spielberg-dinosaur-movie>
, $1.67bn – 60.9% international; 39.1% US
2. Furious 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/05/fast-furious-7-observer-review>, 
$1.52bn – 76.7% int; 23.3% US
3. Avengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/21/avengers-age-of-ultron-review-film-joss-whedon-exhilarating>
, $1.4bn – 67.3% int; 32.7% US
4. Minions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/28/minions-observer-review>, $1.16bn 
– 71% int; 29% US
5. Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/star-wars-the-force-awakens-review-a-spectacular-homecoming>
, $1.09bn – 50.3% int; 49.7% US
6. Inside Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/18/inside-out-review-cannes-film-festival-pixar>
, $851.6m – 58.1% int; 41.9% US
7. Spectre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/21/spectre-review-james-bond-is-back-stylish-camp-and-sexily-pro-snowden>
, $850.2m – 76.9% int; 23.1% US
8. Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/02/mission-impossible-rogue-nation-review-tom-cruise-rebecca-ferguson>
, $682.3m – 71.4% int; 28.6% US
9. The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/19/the-hunger-games-mockingjay-part-2-jennifer-lawrences-katniss-is-still-tough-and-ingenuous>
, $616.7m – 57.1% int; 42.9% US
10. The Martian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/01/the-martian-review-matt-damon-ridley-scott>
, $593.9m – 62.1% int; 37.9% US
11. Fifty Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/11/fifty-shades-of-grey-review>, 
$570.5m – 70.9% int; 29.1% US
12. Cinderella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/13/cinderella-review-kenneth-branaghs-perky-pretty-cupcake-of-a-fairytale>
, $542.7m – 62.9% int; 37.1% US
13. Ant-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/16/ant-man-review-paul-rudd-marvel>, 
$518.6m – 65.3% int; 34.7% US
14. San Andreas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/28/san-andreas-review-dwayne-johnson>
, $473.8m – 67.2% int; 32.8% US
15. Hotel Transylvania 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/15/hotel-transylvania-2-review-adam-sandler>
, $456m – 63.2% int; 36.8% US
16. Terminator Genisys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/30/terminator-genisys-review-arnold-schwarzenegger>
, $440.6m – 79.6% int; 20.4% US
17. Kingsman: The Secret Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/29/kingsman-the-secret-service-review>
, $414.4m – 69% int; 31% US
18. Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/19/home-review-rihanna-kids-animation>
, $386m – 54% int; 46% US
19. Mad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/17/mad-max-fury-road-review-mark-kermode>
, $375.8m – 59.1% int; 40.9% US
20. Taken 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/06/taken-3-review-a-very-exhausted-set-of-skills>
, $326.5m – 72.7% int; 27.3% US
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/The_chancellor_s_reaction_to_SoftBank_s_takeover_of_ARM_was_ludicrous.txt

So this is what Theresa May’s new industrial strategy looks like: the UK’s 
most successful technology company of the past 20 years is being sold to a big 
Japanese buyer while the chancellor whistles, on the basis of no detailed 
scrutiny, that the£24.3bn deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
 is a fine thing. Apparently it shows that “Britain has lost none of its allure 
to international investors” since the EU referendum.

Philip Hammond’s response to SoftBank’s planned purchase of ARM Holdings was 
ludicrous, or at least grossly superficial. SoftBank is indeed making a big bet 
on a British company. But the gamble is on ARM’s ability to find riches in the “
internet of things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/18/what-is-the-internet-of-things-arm-holdings-softbank>
”, the idea that cars and buildings will be adorned with more and better 
microchips in the coming years.

The specifically UK angle is different. It is not the post-Brexit vote 
currency factor, which is debatable, since dollar-earning ARM’s share price has 
risen by 17% since the referendum. Rather, it’s the timing of SoftBank’s 
approach, which looks highly suspicious. The Japanese company might simply have 
wanted to get in quickly before May’s government puts in place a national 
interest test for foreign takeovers.

It was, after all, only a week ago that May said she would cut all the 
political platitudes 
<http://www.theresa2016.co.uk/we_can_make_britain_a_country_that_works_for_everyone>
 about “stakeholder societies” and do something radical. The prime minister was 
damning on how David Cameron’s governmentalmost allowed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/26/pfizer-abandons-attempt-astrazeneca-pharmaceutical>
 AstraZeneca to be sold to Pfizer, the US pharmaceuticals companythat May 
described 
<http://www.theresa2016.co.uk/we_can_make_britain_a_country_that_works_for_everyone>
 as having a “track record of asset stripping and whose self-confessed 
attraction to the deal was to avoid tax”. She concluded: “A proper industrial 
strategy wouldn’t automatically stop the sale of British firms to foreign ones, 
but it should be capable of stepping in to defend a sector that is as important 
as pharmaceuticals is to Britain.”

ARM Holdings to be sold to Japan's SoftBank for £24bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
For pharmaceuticals, read technology. ARM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings> and AstraZeneca, in 
different ways, are cornerstones of a vision of Cambridge as a 21st-century 
centre of excellence in research-led, advanced technology. May’s government, 
following her welcome remarks last week, should explain in detail why the 
Pfizer and SoftBank proposals are different in character.

As it happens, a fair argument could be constructed that the SoftBank deal is 
superior. Pfizer had a grim record of cutting research budgets at every turn. 
SoftBank’s history is different. Its founder and chairman, Masayoshi Son, is
long-termist in outlook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/softbank-arm-deal-masayoshi-son-retirement-technology>
 and tends to give his shareholders and bondholders heart attacks with the 
boldness of some of his bets.

In any case, soft-pedalling on investment would probably be self-defeating for 
SoftBank.ARM’s leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/29/arm-cambridge-britain-tech-company-iphone>
 in designing chips for microprocessors is sustained by big research and 
development budgets, and the recruitment of top-class engineers. SoftBank, 
currently a non-player in the chip market, is also a credible guarantor of 
ARM’s neutrality, another of the British company’s competitive advantages. 
Neutrality, meaning that ARM does not discriminate between customers, is one 
reason why it has been able to grab a 95% share of the chips used in mobile 
phones.

Thus, SoftBank might pass most versions of a credible national interest test. 
There are long-term risks to the UK in allowing ARM to be consumed by a large 
foreign owner with competing claims on its investment resources. On the other 
hand, technology entrepreneurs might be less inclined to launch businesses in 
the UK if they believed that they did not have a free hand when selling. Maybe 
the SoftBank deal would fall on the right side of that tradeoff.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fphilip-hammond-softbank-takeover-arm-holdings-overseas-investors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde5a25ad8b4c6748c2421ab6a68cfebe9b9073b%2F222_0_3278_1967%2F3278.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20chancellor's%20reaction%20to%20SoftBank's%20takeover%20of%20ARM%20was%20ludicrous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fphilip-hammond-softbank-takeover-arm-holdings-overseas-investors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20chancellor%27s%20reaction%20to%20SoftBank%27s%20takeover%20of%20ARM%20was%20ludicrous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fphilip-hammond-softbank-takeover-arm-holdings-overseas-investors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde5a25ad8b4c6748c2421ab6a68cfebe9b9073b%2F222_0_3278_1967%2F3278.jpg>
 ARM and SoftBank branded board displayed at news conference in London on 
Monday. Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
But Hammond, before attempting to massage headlines, should demonstrate that 
the government has done some serious work. It is absurd to opine about the 
benefits for Britain before you have heard from people with harder 
intelligence, such as UK technology leaders and investors, many of whom are 
already lamenting the takeover of ARM. Here are two basic questions that the 
chancellor should have answered before tweeting glib soundbites.

First, is SoftBank’s intention to double the number of ARM employees in the UK 
over five years worth the paper it isn’t yet written on? TheTakeover Panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/oct/21/takeover-panel-bear-hug> will 
police the promise, but what penalty would non-adherence bring? The UK courts 
haven’t yet tested this new system. Even a punishment of a few million quid 
wouldn’t hurt a company of SoftBank’s size. In practice, then, SoftBank’s 
pledge seems no more binding than those that Cameron attempted to extract from 
Pfizer. Indeed, SoftBank may be “committing” to do something that ARM would 
have done under its own steam.

Second, what happens if there is a counter-bid for ARM from a less 
long-termist company? Would Hammond be so welcoming if, say, the would-be buyer 
was a consortium of US private equity barons? What about a South Korean 
microchip manufacturer that licenses ARM’s designs? Such an owner might 
jeopardise ARM’s neutrality and damage long-term investment in the UK. Would 
Hammond want to intervene? If so, what would he actually do?

At the very least, May and Hammond should draw an early lesson from the bid 
for ARM: if you are going to abolish or refine the UK’s open doors takeover 
regime, get on with it. SoftBank might pass a light sniff test, but others will 
not. And the grubbier brigade may interpret Hammond’s verbal gymnastics as 
powerlessness.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/What_women_need_to_do_the_business.txt

Female entrepreneur - a cause for celebration or an oxymoron? Certainly there 
are plenty of men in management positions who subscribe to the view, despite 30 
years of attempts to convince them otherwise, that women cannot cope with the 
confrontations that come with buying and selling.

Trying to come up with the names of high-profile British businesswomen is a 
frustrating experience. Back in the 1980sAnita Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anita-roddick> was a role model for 
female entrepreneurs as head of The Body Shop. More recently Scottish 
businesswoman Michelle Mone took the lingerie world by storm with the launch of 
the Ultimo bra - but the list is woefully short.

A recent report by the London Business School, the Global Entrepreneurship 
Monitor (GEM), shows only 3.8% of women start their own business compared to 
8.5% of men. Over the last two decades despite significant social and cultural 
change in Britain, the proportionate increase in the number of women setting up 
their own business in the UK has been half that of other countries such as the 
United States. It is estimated only 12-14% of businesses in the UK are 
majority-owned by women compared to 28% in the US.

Erika Watson, executive director of Prowess, a trade body for female 
entrepreneurs, says the business culture continually fails to address the needs 
of women. "Most women who are thinking of starting up a business want to do so 
on a part-time basis," she explains. "They are usually the main care providers 
in a family and the idea of working from home is attractive, but the structures 
to support part-time work don't exist - adequate childcare, for example."

Around 40% of all start-ups by women are run on a part-time basis and Prowess 
would like to see start-upgrants extended to these companies. It's not just a 
question of flexible work practices. GEM also found women see fewer 
opportunities and rate their abilities lower than men. Ms Watson says female 
employment is still concentrated in the service and retail sectors where women 
trail men in pay, training, qualifications and promotion. They are 
under-represented in management and in the boardroom. So the average female 
entrepreneur has less managerial experience and less access to business 
networks and finance.

The reasons why women choose to start a business also determine the success or 
failure of an enterprise. Gwenda Stone, chief executive officer of the Aurora 
women's network, has identified two kinds of female-owned firms. "There is the 
'lifestyle' business which is seen as a fun, sexy thing to do, usually 
one-person operations run from the spare room," she explains. "They are 
revenue-capped and provide a modest income. And there is the 'value creation' 
business where a woman wants to see a business develop and grow as a 
seven-days-a-week undertaking." She believes that where men have the edge over 
women is their greater financial savvy. Women tend to set up a company from 
personal savings or credit cards and fund growth from sales. Men go out and 
seek finance with banks and institutions. "Reinvesting profits back into a firm 
is a slow way to grow," she says. "Women forget a business is about making 
money and that money makes money grow. They need more financial education."

Ruth Goodmaker Brown, 40, speaks from personal experience when she describes 
her attempt to strike out on her own. She set up the Perfect Team, a 
Watford-based re cruitment agency three years ago with no formal training or 
experience of running a small business. So far, it has proved to be a good move 
with a turnover of £110,000 in the first year. She admits she's had to fight 
male prejudice. "I've met men who have said to me, 'I know what you women are 
like, at the end of the month you'll put on your sexy gear and to try and do 
business with me'," she says. "I also had one man who rang and asked to speak 
to the managing director. When I told him I was, he hung up."

She insists she couldn't have made a go of the business without sound 
financial advice. She had no savings of her own to put into the business and no 
knowledge of financing one. Eventually she opened an account with the Royal 
Bank of Scotland, one of a number of banks to offer services to female 
entrepreneurs. She talks glowingly of the support and advice the bank has 
offered over the past three years. "I've found it vital to have a good contact 
within the bank." she says. "I suddenly found I was handling all this money and 
writing big cheques and the bank listened to what I had to say and worked with 
me."

Jayne Williams has a different story to tell. She is a lone parent looking 
after two small children who left school at 16 and moved around the north of 
England for a number of years. She moved back to Liverpool and then heard a 
dilapidated launderette was up for sale.

She was on income support and had no money to invest in a business. Banks 
refused to give her any financial backing because she had no previous credit 
history and had never registered on the electoral role. After running into 
numerous financial brick walls, she decided to go ahead and open the 
launderette using the only working machine and operating as a cash business. 
She fixed the other machines herself and eventually went to Train 2000, an 
organisation which offers advice for women en trepreneurs in Merseyside. By 
then she had three working machines but was still on income support and still 
without a bank account.

Ms Williams says it was extremely difficult to get the business off the 
ground. "As a woman on benefit with small children I already felt I was in a 
trap," she explains. "Running my own business was a way for me to get back on 
my feet but no-one gave me any help. All the schemes set up to establish small 
firms are useless unless you have your own money to put in. It's a real Catch 
22 situation."

An independent benefits advisor enabled her to move from income support to the 
Working Families Tax Credit (WFTC) and Easylivin' began trading in 2002. She is 
still angry at the way she was forced to take risks to pull herself out of the 
poverty trap. "It seemed the banks were laughing at me and my grand scheme to 
run my own business," she seethes. "I had to work it all out for myself, 
running costs, accounting, the lot. The people who were supposed to know about 
government grants and loans didn't have a clue." Over the last three years, Ms 
Williams has seen annual turnover nearly double from £8,000 to £13,000. Last 
March she won the Train 2000/Barclays Bank Women in Business Award and with her 
£1,000 winnings bought a van to pick up and drop off cleaning. As soon as the 
business makes a profit she wants to come off the WFTC and has plans to expand 
Easylivin'.

Erika Watson agrees the UK benefit system UK is against female entrepreneurs 
because it is geared towards the traditional model of male unemployment. "There 
are structures in place which discriminate against lone parents on benefit who 
tend to be women," she says. "The amount you can earn on benefit is minuscule, 
which discourages anyone from trying to start a business. If you move from 
income support to tax credit the time delays can be enormous which leaves 
families with no money when they're trying to start a business."

The government has taken steps to encourage more women to set up in business. 
Nine months ago, the DTI's small business service, with help from Prowess, 
launched the Strategic Framework for Women's Enterprise. This aims to increase 
the number of women starting a business in the UK to match levels in the US. By 
2006, the initiative wants women-owned businesses to account for between 18 and 
20% of the UK total.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/Why_ad_men_like_Adam_Crozier_are_dominating_television.txt

The US drama Mad Men has made celebrities of a fictional group of advertising 
men, but on this side of the Atlantic real-life ad execs are emerging as the TV 
industry's off-screen stars. Theappointment of Adam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv-chief-executive>
, the former Royal Mail chief executive who ran Saatchi & Saatchi, as ITV boss, 
one of the most powerful jobs in television, illustrates the influence that the 
image-makers now bring to bear.

His appointment came less than a week after David Abraham, who co-founded the 
fashionable advertising agency St Luke's, wasunveiled as the new C4 chief 
executive. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/22/channel-4-david-abraham-chief-executive>
 He replaces Andy Duncan, a former marketing man. And it is not just in 
commercial television that brand managers are coming to the fore.Tim Davie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/mar/23/interview-tim-davie-bbc>, once 
responsible for safeguarding Pepsi's image in the UK, runs BBC radio and is 
tipped for a bigger role, probably as a channel controller. All were once 
employed by the big multinationals whose commercials and "idents" bankroll 
commercial television.

Comeback kid

Crozier is no stranger to media brands — his clients at Saatchi & Saatchi 
included Sky, News International and theDaily Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> — and those who know him say 
he will have no difficulty glad-handing talent or stroking the egos of 
programme-makers.

"There is a certain coldness about him, but he is also able to switch on the 
wit and charm," says one former Saatchi colleague. Another says: "He is astute 
and very good at managing his own PR. He is a very good operator. He is like 
Mandelson, a comeback kid, and it doesn't seem to matter if he does anything 
slightly dodgy." Mandelson, of course, owes his government position to his 
skills as a media manipulator who transformed the image of the Labour party.

Why have the commanding heights of the British broadcasting industry fallen 
into the hands of a group of slick advertising men? Partly because, like 
chocolate bars or deodorant sprays, there are so many TV channels to choose 
from, and success in a crowded marketplace depends on differentiation. In the 
multichannel era, only those with the strongest hold over viewers can prevent 
them reaching for their remote controls. That is even more important when a 
dazzling array of devices – theApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> iPad is just the latest – 
compete for eyeballs and consumers can also choose "time-shifted" TV.

"In a world where there is lots of noise we need clarity and an understanding 
of brands," says a programming chief. The former chairman of a major agency 
adds: "TV companies are becoming more oriented towards looking at what it is 
that consumers out there today really want. It is a rebalancing from an old 
system where it was 'hey, we make great programmes and the rest will just 
follow'. That was fine when there were only a few TV channels and viewing – and 
revenue – was a cornered market." Although Crozier is better known for his two 
most recent jobs – includingmanaging the FA during negotiations over sports 
rights <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/apr/08/itvdigital.clubsincrisis> 
– it was advertising where he first shone, becoming the agency's youngest board 
director and then the joint chief executive at the age of 31. He had worked at 
the Telegraph in media sales.

One of Abraham's main qualifications for the Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> job was the fact that, when 
running UKTV, he had successfully repositioned its family of channels, 
including UK Gold, by giving them offbeat names such as Dave and Alibi.

He replaces Duncan, a marketeer who began his career at Unilever before 
breathing new life into a free-to-air digital TV platform by calling it 
Freeview. Davie worked for Procter & Gamble and Pepsi, negotiating a famous 
deal with the Daily Mirror, which turned its masthead from red to blue in 1996 
to mark the relaunch of the soft drink, before he was poached by the BBC's 
director general,Mark Thompson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/markthompson>
. He became the director of marketing, communications and audiences – filling 
the job Duncan had left to run Channel 4.

Television companies cannot be run in the same way as companies promoting soft 
drinks or margarine, however, and there are those who worry that the rise of 
the admen reflects a commensurate decline in the influence of programme-makers. 
Crozier's appointment has raised eyebrows because, like the ITV chairman,Archie 
Norman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman>, the Scotsman lacks 
broadcasting experience.

Cutting jobs

Leslie Hill, who retired in 2002 after eight years as the chairman of ITV, 
describes Crozier's appointment as: "A strange one. Someone who was more 
directly exposed to the creative industries would be more appropriate." Hill 
argues that ITV has lost many of its best programme-makers after repeatedly 
cutting jobs and trimming budgets. "That is why shows likeThe X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> are owned by someone 
else, and when they are sold abroad ITV doesn't get money for them," he says.

At least one member of the executive double act needs an instinctive 
understanding of the product the company is selling, he adds, and an empathy 
for those who make it. "What I think ITV needs most of all is for someone to 
understand the way creative people work and to look after them. Norman says 
Crozier has 'steely resolve'. Well great, but my experience is you have to give 
the creative people a good deal of freedom to fail … or their creativity will 
be stunted."

A senior advertising industry executive describes ITV's management duo as "an 
unbalanced team". "Archie and Adam don't know the industry. They're both quick 
studies, don't get me wrong, but people are understandably worried that there's 
going to be too much focus on cost."

When he announced Crozier's appointment on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv-transformation-norman>
, Norman addressed that issue, arguing that ITV already had plenty of 
"broadcasting stars", and mentioning the director of programmes, Peter Fincham 
– regarded by many as a candidate for the chief executive's job – by name. 
Besides, the ITV workforce has already been cut by more than 1,000 in the wake 
of a fierce recession. Programmes have been axed too, andCrozier's track record 
at the Royal Mail, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv1> together with 
Norman's comments last week about the need for "a change in culture and 
organisation as well as business direction", have raised fears of further 
efficiency savings.

"The difficulty in getting the balance between financial controls and allowing 
people to be creative is very difficult to achieve," says Hill, adding: "TV has 
become more and more about business and financial controls." That is because 
broadcasting in general, and ITV in particular, is no longer the cash cow it 
was in the terrestrial era.

Norman and Crozier have fans as well as detractors among those who have 
already tried to remake ITV in the light of this new reality. One of the few 
former ITV executives happy to go on the record was Charles Allen who says: 
"Adam and Archie are very experienced and talented executives with a strong 
track record in a range of businesses. I hope that their complementary skills 
and knowledge coupled with the talent of all the people at ITV will enable the 
company to develop to the next stage and prosper."

Allen was an industry outsider who was famously upbraided by John Cleese as a 
"upstart caterer". Perhaps if he had been an account director at a Soho 
advertising company he would have received a warmer welcome.

Crozier celebrated his 46th birthday on Tuesday, the same day he handed in his 
notice atRoyal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail>. Asked if 
landing the ITV job was the best gift he had received, he said that honour had 
been claimed by his daughters, who presented him with a pair of football boots. 
Salvaging ITV would represent a far bigger prize for Crozier, and it would also 
represent a victory, of sorts, for the UK advertising industry.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/Why_aren_t_more_slasher_movies_set_in_blocks_of_flats_.txt

In Dream Home, the owners of the flat on which Josie Ho is about to exchange 
contracts suddenly jack the price up beyond her reach, so she goes on a killing 
spree in the apartment block. Who can blame her? As anyone who has ever been 
gazumped, gazundered or gaziddled can attest, being cheated out of the property 
on which you've set your heart is enough to make anyone think bad thoughts, 
though I'd like to believe not many of us would go as far as Josie in the 
disembowelling and penis-lopping stakes.

I'm surprised there aren't more slasher movies set in flats. Tenants or 
flatmates can bring out the psycho in all of us simply by using electric drills 
in the middle of the night (Michael Keaton in Pacific Heights) or by doctoring 
our phone messages and stealing our hairstyles (Jennifer Jason Leigh in Single 
White Female). It's almost an afterthought when Keaton and Leigh up the ante by 
brandishing nailguns or pushing puppies out of windows; the damage has already 
been done.

When we think of property in horror movies, our thoughts naturally turn to old 
dark houses, possibly built over ancient Native American burial grounds, or 
more modern though no less haunted homes such as the one in Paranormal 
Activity. But I contend that flats can be even spookier than houses. Living in 
a flat means never being more than a few yards away from the neighbour you 
can't see, but whom you can all too often hear loud and clear, to maddening 
effect.

And, of course, if there's one thing worse than being disturbed by neighbour 
noise, it's being disturbed by neighbour noise and then being told you don't 
have neighbours, which is what happens to poor Cristina Raines in The Sentinel, 
a Michael Winner film that looks battier with each passing year. Raines plays a 
supermodel who rents, for the sort of piffling sum that ought to have made her 
suspicious, a magnificent apartment in Brooklyn Heights, only to discover 
there's more to her fellow tenants than meets the eye. Which is saying 
something, since they include John Carradine as a blind priest, Burgess 
Meredith throwing parties for his cat, and Sylvia Miles and Beverly D'Angelo as 
evil lesbians in leotards who, when asked what they do for a living, say, "We 
fondle each other." This movie is surely ripe for a remake with Kate Moss in 
the lead role.

It's bad enough hearing footsteps over your head, as Raines does, or seeing 
spreading damp patches on your ceiling, like Hitomi Kuroki in Dark Water, even 
before such phenomena are revealed to be of supernatural provenance. Another 
way in which flats can be scarier than houses is they can all be mysteriously 
linked via their bathroom cabinets, like the ones in Candyman, which provide 
portals through which hook-handed bogeymen can gain access to your home, though 
I do think the architect has some serious explaining to do there.

In the worst-case scenario, you could find yourself the sole remaining 
resident of your luxury block of flats who hasn't been turned by parasites into 
a sex-crazed zombie, which is what happens to the occupants of the Starliner 
complex in David Cronenberg's Shivers. Or, like estate agent Carmen Maura in La 
Comunidad, who takes a shine to one of the flats she's supposed to be selling, 
you could end up with everyone in the building ganging up against you and 
baying for your blood.

The king of apartment horror has to be Roman Polanski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/romanpolanski>, who has given us the ultimate 
flat-dweller's nightmare trilogy. Anyone who has lived on their own and 
forgotten to throw away food past its sell-by date will find Catherine 
Deneuve's mental disintegration in Repulsion too close for comfort. Anyone 
whose privacy has been breached by busybodies can relate all too easily to Mia 
Farrow's predicament in Rosemary's Baby – and that's even before the satanic 
chanting starts up next door. And Polanski's degenerating relationship with his 
neighbours in The Tenant – the masterpiece of apartment horror – is liable to 
bring anyone out in a cold sweat. Hell isn't old dark houses – it's other 
people.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/00/_Saving__art_for_the_nation_merely_disguises_the_poverty_of_our_museums.txt

If there is a work of art that’s worth buying for Britain, it is surely 
Alberto Giacometti’s Femme (1928-29). Just a quick look at a photo of this 
modern masterpiece will tell you it is special. There’s a softness to it that 
sensually collides with its squared abstract form. This is dream art, of a 
radical and eerie kind. One circular scoop in the white plaster conjures an 
eye, a slit makes a mouth, and a bigger circular recession suggests … what?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fsaveing-art-nation-giacometti-femme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd615c64a547c85f09efce80d9e7bc07967a72fba%2F32_37_647_1049%2F647.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Saving%20art%20for%20the%20nation%E2%80%99%20merely%20disguises%20the%20poverty%20of%20our%20museums%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fsaveing-art-nation-giacometti-femme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Saving%20art%20for%20the%20nation%E2%80%99%20merely%20disguises%20the%20poverty%20of%20our%20museums%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fsaveing-art-nation-giacometti-femme%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd615c64a547c85f09efce80d9e7bc07967a72fba%2F32_37_647_1049%2F647.jpg>
 Alberto Giacometti made Femme in 1928-29. Photograph: The Department for 
Culture, Media and Sport 
This is a startling, sexualised sculpture that has a lot in common with 
Giacometti’s similarly provocativeSpoon Woman 
<http://www.artic.edu/aic/collections/artwork/37761>, created a year or so 
earlier, not to mention with Picasso’s rollicking distortions of female form 
done in the same era.

It was the time of surrealism. Giacometti, a Swiss artist with a classical 
training and innate gift for sculpture, was a core member of the surrealist 
movement and Femme is a dangerous explosive manifestation of unruly desires and 
fantasies. While its plaster softness is alluring, its sharp angles intimate 
violence and threat, in a way reminiscent of Giacometti’s horrific 1932 
sculptureWoman with Her Throat Cut 
<http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/collection-online/artwork/1424>.

All of which is to say that Femme probably has no chance of being “saved for 
the nation”. This marvellous (in the sense of the word used by the surrealist 
leader André Breton, meaning subversive and irrational) work of art is on sale 
by a British owner for £2,083,500.

The culture minister, Ed Vaizey, has put a temporary export ban on it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/25/alberto-giacometti-sculpture-barred-from-leaving-uk-femme>
 to give galleries a chance to raise the money. The form is that a museum or 
other institution has to get a campaign going, whip up support, and scrape 
together the cash to keep this masterpiece out of the hands of Johnny Foreigner

This way of keeping Britain’s public galleries stocked with art is a fig leaf 
to hide woefully inadequate funding and shabby lack of government interest in 
strengthening our collections. It also depends on fake, nationalistic arguments 
that rarely add much to anyone’s knowledge of art. To “sell” Femme to the 
public, for example, Vaizey has tried to put a patriotic spin on this European 
masterpiece.

Femme came to Britain when it was bought by the British artist Winifred 
Nicholson in the 1930s. It is therefore the kind of work that homegrown Brit 
modernists like Henry Moore and Barbara Hepworth saw and emulated. “This 
Giacometti sculpture is not only a stunning example of his work,” Vaizey 
therefore says, “but also heavily influenced some our greatest artists. It is 
important that Femme is kept in the country so we can better understand and 
enjoy this pivotal period in modern British art.”

Oh God, oh no – please. To say this work of art is important we shouldn’t have 
to embalm it in the dead air of St Ives and mummify it in Henry Moore’s flat 
cap.

Giacometti is not important because a few minor British modernists imitated 
him. Our parochial belief that Moore and his contemporaries were in the same 
league as the great European modern artists is embarrassing. Femme is not 
somehow “British”. It is a completely continental, hardcore surrealist 
masterpiece whose uncanny eroticism has nothing to do with Babs Hepworth’s 
boring seaside and everything to do with the flea markets, brothels, bars and 
mental hospitals of 1920s Paris.

Alberto Giacometti sculpture barred from leaving UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/25/alberto-giacometti-sculpture-barred-from-leaving-uk-femme>
But would that make it sound like something to be saved “for the nation”? The 
very phrase, and the worthy campaigns that use it, imply a narrow sense of 
national property that has nothing to do with great art.

Almost all the works that have been bought after such campaigns in recent 
years are European, and not British, masterpieces, from Titian’sDiana and 
Actaeon <http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/titian-diana-and-actaeon> 
to Manet’sPortrait of Mademoiselle Claus <http://www.ashmolean.org/manet/> – 
and they do not belong by some innate right to Britain. We just happened to 
have them and didn’t want to let them go.

So should we just abandon Giacometti’s Femme to the global art market? After 
all, we can all see online images of it, as you are doing now.

The question needs turning on its head. Instead of drumming up sentimental 
campaigns to cling on to artistic assets, why are we not buying art for the 
nation at auctions in New York? This whole culture of “saving” art is a way of 
disguising the poverty of our museums.

They are all sitting on collections created largely in the heyday of the 
British empire. In the 19th century we were the world’s Dubai, buying up art at 
eye-watering prices. In the 20th century the purse emptied and today’s worthy 
culture of poorly funded public collections grew up, with all its little 
hypocrisies.

The idea that by slapping a temporary export ban on a masterpiece the culture 
minister is doing anything for art is surely the worst of those hypocrisies. If 
a work of art really needs to be in this country, there should be a public fund 
to buy it outright. It should not be left to the enthusiasm of museums and the 
public.

Giacometti’s wicked surrealist woman really does need to stay in Britain 
because we don’t have enough first-rate pieces of modernist art. The government 
should buy it for Tate Modern. And if there isn’t enough money to do that, how 
about selling off some of our excess Henry Moores to create a proper national 
purchasing fund? You can flog the Nicholsons and Bloomsbury group paintings 
too. Sell them for the nation.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/01/15_Caribbean_gems.txt

1. Jungle Bay, Dominica 

Opened in 2005 and set in 55 acres of rainforest, Jungle Bay (
junglebaydominica.com <http://www.junglebaydominica.com>) was built on strong 
eco-principles - from preserving trees and wildlife to using local labour and 
materials - but it doesn't stint on visual impact. The 35 large stilted, 
luxurious rooms are all built from wood and have outdoor solar-powered showers 
to go with the spruced-up Swiss Family Robinson feel. Dominica isn't about 
great beaches (what sand there is is black and volcanic) but the hiking and 
other healthy activities on offer, including kayaking, mountain-biking and 
whalewatching, more than make up for it.

Getting there: Q Holidays (0870 720 1127; qholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.qholidays.co.uk>) can arrange stays at Jungle Bay from £110pp a 
night, including meals, hiking trips, yoga lessons and a half-hour spa 
treatment. Return flights from Gatwick to Antigua start at £583.50 with British 
Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>). Onward return flights from Antigua to 
Dominica start at £68 (liat.com <http://www.liat.com>). 

2. Jade Mountain, St Lucia
 This is not the sort of hotel that gets planned in a corporate boardroom. 
Perched on top of a hill, it has 24 open-sided rooms, all with views of St 
Lucia's iconic Piton mountains and their own infinity swimming pool - which 
allows you to stargaze, swim and commune with hummingbirds, all without leaving 
the privacy of your room. Opened last year, Jade Mountain (
jademountainstlucia.com <http://www.jademountainstlucia.com>) is the newest 
hotel from Nick Troubetzkoy, who also owns Anse Chastenet, an early pioneer in 
quirky Caribbean hotels. This place may be expensive, but it's also endearingly 
undeferential - and Anse Chastenet's bars and restaurants are just a stroll 
away.
Getting there: ITC Classics (01244 355527; itcclassics.co.uk 
<http://www.itcclassics.co.uk>) offers seven nights at Jade Mountain from 
£3,027pp including flights, transfers and B&B accommodation.

3. Tiamo Lodge, Bahamas


On the outlying Bahamian island of South Andros, this hotel is entirely 
solar-powered. Designed both to be low-impact and provide local employment, 
Tiamo (tiamoresorts.com <http://www.tiamoresorts.com>) is very popular with 
honeymooners and serious anglers (who come for the bone fishing). Wraparound 
porches compensate for the lack of air-conditioning.

Getting there: Windows on the Wild (020 8742 1556; windowsonthewild.com 
<http://www.windowsonthewild.com>) has a seven night trip, with six nights' 
full board at Tiamo, including use of kayaks, guided snorkelling (with 
equipment) and hikes, and one night in Nassau, from £1,975pp, including flights 
via Miami with American Airlines and the internal flights.

4. Plantation Beach Villas, Tobago

This collection of six three-bedroom villas was designed by Swede Arne 
Hasselqvist, who was also responsible for many houses on the ritzier island of 
Mustique. Here, amid the gingerbread-style houses, verandas and gardens, the 
atmosphere is deliberately low-key. There's a small bar and restaurant, but all 
the villas have kitchens. The staff (each villa has an attendant) are flexible 
enough to take you shopping, cook dinner and babysit (or leave you alone), 
making this an almost perfect destination for families with small children. All 
the villas share a pool, while uncrowded Stonehaven beach can be reached 
through a small gate. The front desk can book scuba diving and boat trips (
plantationbeachvillas.com <http://www.plantationbeachvillas.com>). 

Getting there: Real Holidays (020 7359 3938; realholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.realholidays.co.uk>) has seven nights at Plantation Beach Villas 
from £1,016pp, based on a family of four, including accommodation and flights.

5. Cocobay, Antigua

All-inclusive hotels are usually the preserve of big hotel chains, but Cocobay 
bucks the trend (cocobayresort.com <http://www.cocobayresort.com>). Most of the 
53 rooms are in simple but sweet tin-roofed cottages. They don't have 
televisions or phones but all the other facilities are in place. There's a 
swimming pool, a bar and two restaurants. The hotel aims to source both food 
and staff locally and it's within walking distance of three beaches. However, 
it's not an option for families with small children: the minimum age for guests 
is 14 (except at Christmas). The owners of Cocobay opened Hermitage Bay on 
Antigua's west coast last year, which works on the same principles - with a 
higher level of luxury, and a commensurately higher price. As one recently 
returned guest put it, 'it's the sort of place that gives all-inclusives a good 
name'.

Getting there: Caribtours (020 7751 0660; caribtours.co.uk 
<http://www.caribtours.co.uk>) has seven nights at Cocobay, including flights, 
transfers and all-inclusive accommodation, for £1,061pp.

6. Ku, Anguilla 

Anguilla is known for its extraordinarily expensive hotels, but two years ago, 
Cap Juluca - one of the most exclusive - opened the 27-room Ku (ku-anguilla.com 
<http://www.ku-anguilla.com>) where the minimalist decor (white walls, white 
floor, white furnishings) is well suited to the island's white sand beaches and 
general air of seclusion. But, like a diffusion range from a top fashion 
designer, Ku ticks the desirability boxes while remaining within the reach of 
ordinary mortals, so instead of Cap Juluca's privacy-minded luxury, Ku is 
located on a more public beach - with a good choice of local restaurants within 
walking distance. For pricey Anguilla, it's a bargain.

Getting there: Tropic Breeze (01548 831550; tropicbreeze.co.uk 
<http://www.tropicbreeze.co.uk>) has seven nights at Ku on a room-only basis 
for selected dates between 1 April and 19 December, including flights with BA 
from Gatwick to Antigua and onward to Anguilla with Liat, from £999pp.

7. Beau Rive, Dominica 
 More proof that Dominica has picked up the low-key tourism torch and is 
running with it, Beau Rive (beaurive.com <http://www.beaurive.com>), owned by 
former musician Mark Steele since 2004, has just eight guest rooms, with 
balconies, within a plantation house, plus a swimming pool. A spice garden 
adjoins the hotel's restaurant, which serves whatever is fresh and available. 
John Faithfull of Trips Worldwide says: 'Visitors are made to feel like Mark's 
house guests, and we get great feedback from clients.'
Getting there: Trips Worldwide (0117 311 4418; tripsworldwide.com 
<http://www.tripsworldwide.com>) offers holidays from £1,149pp (based on two 
sharing), including flights to Antigua and on to Dominica with Liat, transfers 
and seven nights in a double room with breakfast.

8. Ginger Lily, St Lucia

The Ginger Lily (gingerlilyhotel.com <http://www.gingerlilyhotel.com>) may be 
a simple 11-room hotel but it is perfectly placed for the bars of Rodney Bay 
and party-minded Reduit beach. Just one block back from the beach, with its own 
pool, restaurant and bar, it has large rooms, all with balconies, and all of 
them surrounding a mellow pool area; and the rates are a bargain. It is plugged 
into the local community, which makes organising activities, including scuba 
diving and jet-skiing, a doddle.

Getting there: Caribbean Unpackaged (020 8446 8122; caribbean-unpackaged.com 
<http://www.caribbean-unpackaged.com>) has superior rooms at Ginger Lily from 
£81 a night, not including flights. Virgin Atlantic (virgin-atlantic.com 
<http://www.virgin-atlantic.com>) flies direct to St Lucia three times a week 
from Gatwick and once a week from Manchester, return fares from £595.

9. Petit Bacaye, Grenada 
 In this collection of five palm-thatched houses, things are kept deliberately 
simple - there's no air-conditioning, no television and no swimming pool. 
However, the beach lies a few steps away, the hotel provides mosquito repellent 
and there are hammocks at every turn. You'll probably need a hire car to make 
the most of Grenada, but there's a bakery and a mini-market within a short 
walk, while a swim takes you to a nearby island which is a nature reserve for 
egrets. Even though all the houses have kitchens, Petit Bacaye (petitbacaye.com 
<http://www.petitbacaye.com>) takes the Caribbean fantasy thing seriously - 
there are regular beach barbecues, and fishermen deliver their catch to the 
restaurant daily straight from the boat. It's owned by Peter Pilbrow and Julia 
Montgomery, who own the acclaimed Onion Store hotel in Romsey, Hampshire.
Getting there: Just Grenada (01373 814214; justgrenada.co.uk 
<http://www.justgrenada.co.uk>) charges £695pp for a week in a one-bedroom 
cottage sleeping two, including flights from Gatwick, accommodation and 
transfers.

10.Hostal Del Tejadillo, Cuba 

This is the sort of hotel that you'd hope Havana would be overrun with. Unlike 
most of the city's unlovely Soviet-inspired hotels, the Tejadillo is a colonial 
palace, located on an atmospherically run-down street, near Plaza de la 
Catedral and five minutes' walk from the Malecon waterfront. Yes, it's a bit 
musty and disorganised, and the facilities are a bit basic, but all 32 of the 
high-ceilinged bedrooms open on to a central courtyard with fountain, and all 
have a balcony or a patio. And there's a bar.

Getting there: Journey Latin America (020 8747 8315; journeylatinamerica.co.uk 
<http://www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk>) has three nights at the Hostal del 
Tejadillo, including flights on Virgin Atlantic, from £630pp.

11.Maca Bana, Grenada 

Maca Bana (macabana.com <http://www.macabana.com>) is a small collection of 
seven villas on a hillside which share an infinity swimming pool. Decorated by 
the artist owner Rebecca Thompson, the villas are very well equipped - with 
proper kitchens, outdoor hot tubs and staggering views. Painting and cookery 
classes can be arranged, although the improbably beautiful Magazine beach is 
likely to be the greatest temptation. In general, only children over 12 are 
welcomed, owing to the steep climb from beach back to the hotel, but the hotel 
is flexible and can advise families on which are the less precipitous villas. 
Thompson and her husband also own Aquarium on Magazine beach, considered to be 
one of Grenada's best restaurants.

Getting there: Caribtours (020 7751 0660; caribtours.co.uk 
<http://www.caribtours.co.uk>) has seven nights at Maca Bana, including 
flights, transfers and room-only accommodation, for £1,445pp.

12. Lodge At Chaa Creek, Belize 

Even before Francis Ford Coppola opened his eco-lodges in Belize, Chaa Creek (
chaacreek.com <http://www.chaacreek.com>) was taking the greener approach to 
tourism. With some road-building help from the British army, this organic farm 
opened its first rooms in 1981. It is run by an Anglo-American couple, Mick and 
Lucy Fleming. Lying beside the Macal River in 330 acres of rainforest, it has 
just 21 stone and palm-thatched cottages, and a restaurant that serves locally 
sourced food. The eco-principles are still strong - there's no air-conditioning 
anywhere on the resort, nor is there a swimming pool - instead, guests can take 
a dip in the river, and the hotel runs particularly good tours into the local 
area to visit Mayan ruins.

Getting there: Journey Latin America (020 8747 8315; journeylatinamerica.co.uk 
<http://www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk>) has three nights at Chaa Creek for 
£1,444pp full board, including British Airways flights (0870 850 9850;ba.com 
<http://www.ba.com>). 

13. Gate House, Saba 

You can walk from Saba's tiny airport to the Gate House (sabagatehouse.com 
<http://www.sabagatehouse.com>). In fact you can walk pretty much anywhere on 
Saba; this Dutch Caribbean island is just five miles long and has only one 
road. Saba doesn't do vast golden-sand beaches but the hiking is as good as the 
snorkelling and the views across to St Barts come as a bonus. Owned by a French 
couple, the Gate House also has a notably good restaurant (with an excellent 
wine cellar) for an island with just 1,500 residents. There are seven guest 
rooms, which share a swimming pool but families might prefer the hotel's 
four-bedroom villa, which has its own private pool.

Getting there: Doubles start at $125 a night including breakfast. Get there by 
flying to St Maarten via Amsterdam with KLM (klm.com <http://www.klm.com>) and 
then to Saba with Winair (flywinair.com <http://www.flywinair.com>). 
Alternatively you can fly to Antigua with BA and connect to St Maarten with 
Winair.

14. Little Arches, Barbados

A far cry from Barbados's torpid (and aptly named) Platinum coast, which is 
awash with stultifyingly luxurious hotels, the 10-room Little Arches (
little-arches.com <http://www.little-arches.com>) is a short walk from the 
determinedly normal village of Ostins in the south of the island. All the 
beaches in Barbados are technically public, but Enterprise beach, just across 
the road from Little Arches, is genuinely so. Used by both locals and tourists, 
it has a handy stall selling drinks and snacks and a palpable sense of 
relaxation. Back at the hotel, there's a small rooftop pool - several of the 
rooms lead out on to it. Bicycles are also provided for guests (this part of 
Barbados is pleasingly flat) and the hotel has its own yacht for excursions. It 
also has a good restaurant, La Luna, which is run by one of the hotel's 
co-owners, Mark DeGruchy.

Getting there: Caribbean Expressions (020 7433 2610; expressionsholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.expressionsholidays.co.uk>) has seven nights at Little Arches from 
£1,117pp, including flights, transfers and B&B accommodation.

15. Jake's, Jamaica 
 Jamaica has some wonderful hotels, including the Rockhouse (where the Rolling 
Stones cavorted in the 1970s) and Mockingbird Hill, an eco-lodge which runs an 
adult literacy programme for its employees. However, Jake's (islandoutpost.com 
<http://www.islandoutpost.com>) on Treasure Beach continues to stand out from 
the crowd. Part of the Island Outpost empire founded by Chris Blackwell of 
Island Records fame, but owned by theatrical designer Sally Henzell and her son 
Jason, this 26-room hotel continues to feel fantastically connected to the 
local environment. Guests are encouraged to visit local cafes and restaurants. 
While groovy, endearingly louche Jake's has traditionally spurned modern 
conveniences such as air-conditioning and televisions, the hotel's newly opened 
Treasure Beach House is a four-bedroom villa which comes with satellite TV, 
plunge pool and air-conditioning.
Getting there: Trips Worldwide (0117 311 4418; tripsworldwide.com 
<http://www.tripsworldwide.com>) has seven nights' room only at Jake's from 
£1,239pp including flights and transfers.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/01/Can_PledgeMusic_s_direct_to_fan_approach_unlock_untapped_revenue_.txt

Record labels are leaving billions of pounds in revenue on the table every 
year by only offering music fans "ways to spend less", says Benji Rogers, 
co-founder and CEO of direct-to-fan platformPledgeMusic 
<http://www.pledgemusic.com/>. A recent Nielsen study 
<http://www.billboard.com/biz/articles/news/digital-and-mobile/1551730/nielsen-study-music-industry-could-add-450-million-to>
 supports his claim, concluding that US fans are willing to spend an extra 
$2.6bn a year on premium access to their favourite artists.

"The music industry said 'let's just put a bunch of stuff up on a page or 
let's ask for money'. So much more is possible. You and I are music fans. I 
want to be the one who says 'I was there'," explains Rogers. "What bothers me 
is that some of my favourite bands offer me a sloppy 'buy' button, and two 
weeks later something shows up. Fuck it – I'll stream it."

To illustrate, he has registered a Google alert that says "announces album", 
and every day he gets a list of links saying "so-and-so" announces new album. 
"I'll defy you to find one button that allows you to pre-order that album – 
because it doesn't exist yet," he says. "All it says is that it'll be out in 
January. What am I supposed to do with that? You know that bit in Spinal Tap 
when they say 'you can't promote something that doesn't exist' – the answer is 
that today you can. If you offer the journey of that album, then everybody 
wins."

Offering this journey is what PledgeMusic specialises in. The average pledger, 
based on the past six months, spends $57 per transaction on the site, and for 
that money they don't just get the album and/or merchandise – they get 
exclusive, immediate video updates from the artist, as the record is being 
created.

"Think about it: 22,000 records released every week in the same fucking way," 
exclaims Rogers. "We now launch, put into production and release two to three 
albums per day – and have done for the last year and a half – but each one of 
those has a journey.

"The last piece that can't be stolen and disseminated en masse is the 
experience, because even if you get it later on, it's not in real time. What's 
exciting is what happens now – that's the very nature of Facebook's business, 
of social networking. Musicians are fascinating while they're working. When 
that ends, they're just selling."

He's at pains to clarify that Pledge is not a crowdfunding platform, or a 
direct-to-consumer service. "Crowdfunding is 'please give money, then I will 
do'," he elaborates. "Direct-to-consumer is 'I've done it, here's five ways to 
buy it.' We're in the middle with 'be a part of the making of it' – it truly is 
direct-to-fan."

Crowdfunding platforms such as Kickstarter and Indiegogo offer campaigns that 
last for about 30 days and then they're done. After that the pledgers have to 
wait for months until the album comes. The Pledge platform doesn't show how 
much money is being raised because, Rogers says, that injects a different 
quality into the campaign. "If I say to you 'help me raise $10,000', you'll ask 
'what for?' If I say 'be part of my album' there is no 'what for'," he explains.

Judging by the exponential increase in artists and labels getting on board, as 
well as repeat customers, this approach works. The number of pledgers tend to 
increase with every project, with many fans telling Pledge that this is the way 
they want all their albums delivered from now on.

Juliana Hatfield is currently running her third album project on the site 
<http://www.pledgemusic.com/projects/hatfield>, and she already has 827 pledges 
that have helped her reach 132% of the goal set when launching the campaign.

According to Rogers, Pledge campaigns now exceed their pledge/pre-order goals 
86% of the time, and the average is 30% over target. The company estimates that 
artists using the platform can get 37% more than if they just did a 
crowdfunding campaign, especially if they utilise the expertise of the Pledge 
staff to optimise the use of social media.

I first interviewed Rogers in December 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/dec/10/future-fan-funding>, 
when the company had just launched. It then consisted of five people operating 
in a room in a Covent Garden basement, next to a rehearsal room. Its clients 
were all self-releasing artists and there were less than a handful of campaigns 
launched each week.

Fast forward and PledgeMusic is about to hire its 35th staff member, with 
offices in Boston, Los Angeles, New York, London, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, 
Australia and, soon, Japan.

Both independent and major record labels have also realised how beneficial the 
Pledge platform can be for their artists. Rogers says the company has proven 
that it can double the income a label makes from direct-to-consumer, "with no 
loss or threat to any other aspect of their business".

Earlier this year, Sony Music UK teamed up with PledgeMusic to launch a 
direct-to-fan pre-sale campaign for its Sheffield-based rock act Bring Me the 
Horizon 
<http://prwire.com.au/pr/35073/pledgemusic-teams-up-with-sony-music-australia-rca-records-bring-me-the-horizon-and-raw-power-management>
. The album went to No 3 in the UK album chart, No 1 in Australia and No 11 in 
the US. "Ben Folds Five was our first US top 10," adds Rogers. "We just did our 
first Canadian top 10 with Universal act the Headstones."

Perhaps one of the most glowing endorsements for direct-to-fan crowdfunding is 
thatAmanda Palmer, who last year raised $1.2m on Kickstarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/26/amanda-palmer-future-of-music>, 
is now using the Pledge platform 
<http://www.pledgemusic.com/artists/amandapalmer>.

This may be something for Lady Gaga and her label Universal to ponder. Last 
weekit announced that her next album is on its way – arriving in stores in 
November 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/appsblog/2013/jul/12/lady-gaga-artpop-app-release-date>
.

As Rogers put it: "Fans know that it [the making of the album] is going on, 
but that it is being hidden from them – it's almost antagonising."
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/01/Leaked_map_reveals_chronic_mercury_epidemic_in_Peru.txt

Ask about the fish in restaurants in the centre of Puerto Maldonado, the 
biggest town in Peru’s south-east Amazon, and you’ll hear all kinds of things. 
Some people will shake their heads and say there isn’t any fish on the menu 
“because of the contamination” or “out of protocol”. Others might say thereis 
fish available, before sometimes hastily clarifying that it comes from farms 
along the Inter-Oceanica Highway running to Brazil, or from the Pacific coast, 
or even, according to one chef, all the way from Vietnam.

Why such problems with the fish in this part of the Amazon? Answer: alluvial 
gold and the mercury required to extract it. The gold-rush in the 8.5m hectare 
Madre de Dios region began in the 1980s and, by 2012, miners had destroyed more 
than 50,000 hectares of forest, effectively dumping 100s of tons of mercury 
into the rivers while doing so. In May this year Peru’s outgoing government 
announced a pathetic 60-day“declaration of emergency” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/andes-to-the-amazon/2016/jun/19/top-peruvian-amazon-tourist-invaded-gold-miners>
.

An image of a unpublished map obtained by the Guardian, based on “preliminary 
results” from studies of local inhabitants by the Duke Global Health Institute 
in the US, provides some idea of how widely-spread and severe the mercury 
contamination is across Madre de Dios. Arguably the map’s most alarming 
revelation is that the most contaminated area of all isupstream from the 
mining: the stretch of the River Madre de Dios between towns called Boca 
Colorado and Boca Manu, a significant part of which is in the buffer zone of 
the Manu national park, which Unesco calls the most biodiverse place on earth.

“It is noteworthy that some areas with high averages of mercury are upriver 
from the mining zones,” states the map, which was shown to Health Ministry 
officials earlier this year.

The map suggests the second worse-hit area is inside the Manu park itself, 
immediately upriver from Boca Manu, along the River Manu’s left bank. The right 
bank is affected too. William Pan, the study’s lead researcher, told the 
Guardian “we didn’t sample people in Manu national park”, but explains the map 
on the basis that his teams have sampled several communities “along that bend 
of the river (Rio Manu/Rio Madre de Dios)” and “the map smoothing method 
creates a 10km buffer around the study sites and the exposure is extrapolated”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fleaked-map-reveals-chronic-mercury-epidemic-in-perus-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb27212e04d41fc32e168430ef9b13dfdc10f761e%2F0_0_4160_2340%2F4160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leaked%20map%20reveals%20chronic%20mercury%20epidemic%20in%20Peru&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fleaked-map-reveals-chronic-mercury-epidemic-in-perus-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leaked%20map%20reveals%20chronic%20mercury%20epidemic%20in%20Peru&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fleaked-map-reveals-chronic-mercury-epidemic-in-perus-amazon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb27212e04d41fc32e168430ef9b13dfdc10f761e%2F0_0_4160_2340%2F4160.jpg>
 According to US-based scientists, the people living upriver from gold-mining 
in Peru’s Madre de Dios region are the most contaminated by mercury. The 
worst-affected areas are shaded in red, the second-worst in orange, the third 
worst yellow. “µg/kg” should read “mg/kg.” Photograph: Anon. 
How come people upstream are the most contaminated? Or maybe the mercury there 
has little or nothing to do with gold? As acknowledged by a 2011 report by the 
Environment Ministry, titled Gold-mining and Mercury Contamination in Madre de 
Dios: a Time-Bomb, mercury stored naturally in Amazon soil and vegetation is 
released when the forest is cut down or burnt and then leaches into the water.

Pan describes the mercury levels recorded by Duke as “very high” and says 
Madre de Dios is experiencing a “chronic mercury epidemic.” The contamination 
upstream was, he says, “the most surprising finding of our human Hg [mercury] 
assessment.”

“The communities near the confluence of Rio Manu and Rio Madre de Dios have 
the highest exposures in the region,” Pan told the Guardian. “When we tested 
fish, water and sediment, none of the values were high. So we were surprised 
when people were detected with high levels. We have several hypotheses that we 
are evaluating.”

According to Pan, those hypotheses are the people in that region migrate 
downriver to work in the mining, and that they are more dependent than the rest 
of Madre de Dios on local agriculture, fish and meat because there are no 
roads. Another is that “due to reliance on fish consumption, they are likely 
eat larger fish, which will have more Hg just naturally”.

Pan says the map was “supposed to be confidential with the Ministry of Health” 
because it is “unpublished data and we have not fully analysed all the 
samples,” calling it “very crude” and far from final. He told the Guardian it 
is based on three distinct studies conducted between May 2014 and June 2016, 
and the final results will include samples from almost 72 sites. He says the 
Health Ministry has “real monetary constraints right now due to expenditures of 
the prior ministry”.

Previous research by Pan and colleagues argued that mercury contamination is 
generating “significant health risks” for communities in Madre de Dios 
“hundreds of kilometres” downstream from the mining, particularly among 
children and indigenous people.

“Children living within the central portion of the [Madre de Dios] watershed 
cannot safely consume carnivorous fish without exceeding recommended 
international [mercury] body burdens,” stated an article by Pan et al in
Environmental Science 
<https://globalhealth.duke.edu/media/news/duke-study-finds-devastating-effects-mercury-gold-mines>
 in January 2015. “Deforestation and mercury release are an immediate threat to 
both local and distant downstream communities, many of which do not benefit 
economically from [the mining].”

The law announcing Peru’s declaration of emergency in May stated that many 
people in Madre de Dios have “higher than the maximum recommended limits” of 
mercury, which causes “serious, chronic and complex health problems, 
particularly in children and pregnant women.”

“[M]ercury contamination of the air, water, sediment and fish is the result of 
inadequate practices by illegal and informal gold-miners during the extraction 
and working of alluvial gold,” the law stated. “In addition, there are people 
located beyond the mining extraction zones that are at high risk of being 
contaminated with mercury because of the high levels of it detected in the 
environment and in certain fish species, especiallyMota Punteada, which is part 
of the daily diet of Madre de Dios’s population.”

The social and environmental tragedy unfolding in Madre de Dios has been known 
about for many years: the Ministry of Environment dubbed it a “time-bomb” five 
years ago, but the bomb was ticking long before that. Will Peru’s new 
government, led by president Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, now take sincere, 
sustainable, non-violent steps to address the problem - not just in the Boca 
Manu region, obviously, butacross Madre de Dios and Peru’s Amazon as a whole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/andes-to-the-amazon/2016/may/01/gold-mining-in-peru-forests-razed-millions-lost-virgins-auctioned>
? What steps can the government take to initiate a massive public health 
campaign and inform those who are contaminated, or are at risk, and provide 
access to treatment – and if it doesn’t have the funds do so, who can provide 
them? What forms of alternative employment can be created, so those who find 
themselves forced to mine and handle mercury have other options? What steps can 
those buying, selling, hoarding, working and wearing Peruvian gold take to 
ensure they stop contributing to the devastation of huge swathes of the Amazon 
and the contamination of 1,000s of people living there?

The World Health Organization calls mercury “one of the top ten chemicals or 
groups of chemicals of major public health concern”, and states that human 
activity, including gold-mining and coal-fired power stations, is the “main 
cause of mercury releases.”

Peru is one of the world’s biggest gold producers, with the main importers 
being Canada, India, Switzerland, the UK and the US. A report published in 
April by the Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime argued 
that 28% of all gold inPeru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru> is 
illegal, with illegal gold-mining across Latin America increasingly controlled 
by drugs traffickers and “organized crime” groups.

In January Peru ratified the Minamata Convention on Mercury, a legally-binding 
global treaty which commits parties to regulate artisanal and small-scale 
mining, among other things, and states that “parties may cooperate with each 
other” to stop altogether the use of mercury or mercury compounds in such 
mining. Switzerland and the US have ratified the Convention too, but Canada, 
India and the UK haven’t.

Peru’s Health Ministry did not respond to questions.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/01/SABMiller_does_not_need_a_saviour___it_s_time_for_the_chairman_to_speak_up.txt

There are no hard definitions of the jargon used in takeover bids but “a very 
substantial undervaluation” should not require much interpretation. It surely 
means a lot more than a gap of 3.2%. SABMiller’s chairman, Jan du Plessis, 
would look ridiculous if, having used those words last week when rejecting a 
£42.15-a-share proposal from Anheuser-Busch InBev, he then rolled over and said 
yes to £43.50.

In practice, Du Plessis may feel his freedom to speak his mind is constrained 
by the views of his big shareholders. Altria, the Marlboro cigarette firm with 
a 27% holding, has already deserted to the bidder’s camp. If the Santo Domingo 
family from Colombia, with 14%, wants to acceptthe new terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/12/megabrew-takeover-major-sabmiller-investor-rejects-takeover-approach>
 (in share alternative form), then resistance becomes tricky to sustain, or so 
the unwritten rule for company chairmen says.

But directors are paid to give their opinions on a company’s worth and 
prospects, not to be an echo chamber. If Du Plessis meant what he said last 
week, he should reject £43.50 a share whatever his shareholders think. It would 
not be an outrageous stance. Ever sinceAB InBev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anheuser-busch> made its move a month 
ago, £45 a share has always seemed the minimum price SAB should demand to open 
its books.

That’s for two reasons. First, AB InBev timed its move opportunistically. 
SAB’s shares were trading at close to £38 in March before investors started to 
fret about emerging markets. Those general worries apply to SAB in the short 
term, and possibly the medium term, but the company’s ability to sell more beer 
in, say, Africa over the next few decades is not altered one jot. SAB is almost 
the definition of a stock to hold and forget. Shareholders get to sell a 
company only once. At the very least, SAB should depart at a premium to 
comparable takeovers in the sector, which implies at least a couple more quid 
on the current offer.

The second reason to reject the latest offer is that SAB has a superb record 
and investors would be taking little risk in sticking with what they know. SAB 
is not a Cadbury Schweppes, struggling to defend its chequered returns when 
Kraft came calling in 2009. It is the world’s second-largest brewer and has 
only enriched its shareholders during its 15 years on the London market. It 
doesn’t need a saviour.

SAB’s board, having been told of AB InBev’s new offer yesterday morning, did 
not manage to respond by the time the market closed. That may suggest 
nervousness in the ranks. But du Plessis’ correct reply should be obvious given 
his past statements: £43.50 is still not enough. If he says something 
different, he’s lost his bottle or his command of the English language, or both.

Glencore’s debt plans remain in spotlight
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsabmiller-chairman-anheuser-busch-inbev-shares-offer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e7115e15f26d512b1e8f94bc7b97aed2fd05784%2F0_0_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SABMiller%20does%20not%20need%20a%20saviour%20%E2%80%93%20it's%20time%20for%20the%20chairman%20to%20speak%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsabmiller-chairman-anheuser-busch-inbev-shares-offer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SABMiller%20does%20not%20need%20a%20saviour%20%E2%80%93%20it%27s%20time%20for%20the%20chairman%20to%20speak%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsabmiller-chairman-anheuser-busch-inbev-shares-offer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e7115e15f26d512b1e8f94bc7b97aed2fd05784%2F0_0_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
 Glencore says the copper market remains distorted. Photograph: Reuters 
Under normal circumstances, Ivan Glasenberg would surely wish to be buying, 
not selling, a couple of second-tier copper mines. After all, Glencore’s great 
trader told an FT conference the other day that the copper market is 
“distorted” and prices do not reflect the low level of stocks and the continued 
healthy demand from China.

These are not normal circumstances. Glencore is obliged to be in the 
debt-reduction game and would-be buyers of peripheral assets must be given a 
hearing.Thus the company has appointed investment bankers to check out the real 
level of interest in the Cobar mine in Australia and Lomas Bayas in Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/12/glencore-plans-copper-mine-sales>
.

Analysts estimate the mini-collection might fetch up to $1bn. That barely 
moves the dial in the context of Glencore’s borrowings of $30bn, which is why 
the main plot still centres on the original plans for reducing borrowings. But 
these add-on copper negotiations still have significance. We know Glasenberg 
can over-pay for assets in good times – witness Xstrata in 2013. But can he 
persuade others to do the same in a different climate for the mining industry?

Tesco’s ‘brand guarantee’ looks set to disappoint
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsabmiller-chairman-anheuser-busch-inbev-shares-offer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9c8df57b7101d721406ff882d9fb5cba65d7fa8%2F0_0_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SABMiller%20does%20not%20need%20a%20saviour%20%E2%80%93%20it's%20time%20for%20the%20chairman%20to%20speak%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsabmiller-chairman-anheuser-busch-inbev-shares-offer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SABMiller%20does%20not%20need%20a%20saviour%20%E2%80%93%20it%27s%20time%20for%20the%20chairman%20to%20speak%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsabmiller-chairman-anheuser-busch-inbev-shares-offer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9c8df57b7101d721406ff882d9fb5cba65d7fa8%2F0_0_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Tesco’s new price scheme covers only branded products. Photograph: Jonathan 
Hordle/Rrc 
Every supermarket chain likes to claim its new price scheme is the best in the 
business. In Tesco’s case, however,its new “brand guarantee”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/12/tesco-offers-money-back-at-the-checkout-in-new-price-promise-scheme>
isn’t even better than the version it replaces in one important respect. The 
new scheme covers only branded products whereas the old one, “price promise”, 
also included own-label goods and fresh food.

There is an important compensation, of course. Instead of being given a 
voucher to be redeemed against a future purchase, any money owed will be 
returned instantly at the till or online checkout. That’s a useful feature if 
you are the sort of person who loses, or can’t be bothered with, small pieces 
of paper (and, note,Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> says 
half the old vouchers were never used).

But, for those Tesco shoppers who are organised and diligent users of 
vouchers, a narrower scheme that covers fewer goods is plainly inferior. 
Overall, one suspects this revamp will annoy as many customers as it pleases.

It is also odd that Tesco went to the high court last year to defend, 
successfully, its right to compare the price of its own-label goods against 
those of Sainsbury’s, which argued its own ingredients were better. What was 
that fuss all about?
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/01/The_digital_readership_is_out_there__But_is_there_money_too_.txt

It's been the most palpable, pitiful lack ever since newspapers started their 
own websites. You could tell, from ABC print copy counts, how many physical 
papers you were selling. You could calculate, from National Readership Surveys, 
how many people were reading your words. But there was no agreed way of 
evaluating the visitors who clicked onto your site every day. And since the 
point of gathering such data was to help sell advertising and raise revenue, 
who could wonder that digital ads were only raising maybe a tenth of their 
print equivalents?

But now, a giant step for mediakind. The NRS, adding more mass surveying, is 
publishing quarterly figures that put newsstand and cyberspace together. Is 
print reading declining? Are we about to perform more obsequies over the 
written word? No. This total picture pulsates with life and, often, growth.

Take the Guardian and the Observer, happily enough. The monthly reach of the 
two titles combined, on the net and in print, is 9,571,000. That's more than the
Telegraph and Sunday Telegraph (9,459,000); more than the Indy and Sindy 
(5,834,000); and much more than the Times and Sunday Times, nestling behind a 
paywall (7,928,000). A dominant lead: those who see a digital world supplanting 
the presses for ever will find plenty to cheer them.

Perhaps, at first sight, the redtop tabloids, making big money from 
cover-price sales, seem to dominate the market as before. TheSun – with 
17,793,000 readers, only 10% of them online – is still just top of the shop. 
But in terms of progress online, theGuardian (with nearly six readers clicking 
on to the digital edition for every five readers in print), theTelegraph and the
Independent are strongly placed; and titles that haven't made much of an effort 
look bereft. Where does thePeople (with only 5.3% of its readers online) go 
next? Or the shrinkingStar and the Express, with 8.1% and 8.2% respectively? 
Can the Lebedevs be buoyant about anEvening Standard, with the obvious website 
potential to dominate London, boasting a mere 10% online? Why are some 
managements reaching for the future, while others huddle in their tents?

At which point, all the euphoria needs nuancing. The NRS, like the ABC, exists 
to serve advertisers. And it isn't too clear that ad agencies are yet bowled 
over when online and print figures are rolled into one. ABC in America has done 
that for some time, but the latest statistics (covering the first half of 2012) 
show US papers losing $25 in print ad revenue for every lone greenback they 
gain online. Though Madison Avenue men are pleased enough to praise online's 
potential, they seem pretty sour when it comes to paying more than a fraction 
of what print can command – and analysts stand in line behind them, asserting 
that print reading time far exceeds quickly clicking from page to page.

In short, though newspapers are finding a formidable new readership market 
online, they still haven't been able to monetise it properly. Will that get 
easier as merged counts become more familiar? Let's hope that the NRS has made 
a decisive breakthrough.

But note how integrated figuring also raises vexed questions, such as 
pluralism and the horrors of Murdoch hegemony. The combined readership of the
Mail and Guardian (his two doughtiest critics) leaves the combined total of the 
Sun, Times and Sunday Times far behind. Free versus paid-for online access? 
Free draws big numbers, but can it raise enough ad money to mind the gaps? It's 
a debate as yet; no conclusions. But at least the debate just got more 
interesting.

 Taking the wraps off


The ABC circulation medals for Olympic August were largely putty and paste. 
But theDaily Mirror (under its new editor) managed a modest rise on July. So 
did theDaily Telegraph and the i as well as six Sundays – including the Observer
. And gold goes to theTimes, which put on nearly 4,000 via the wheeze of 
wrapping itself in a 2012 picture and flooding the streets of London with 
"souvenir" editions. Smart thinking, soon copied; and as legacy as they come …
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/02/A_working_life__the_lingerie_designer.txt

Tiffany Taylor carries bras in her handbag and sometimes, when she forgets 
herself, they dangle from her hand. "Occasionally I'll walk into the London 
underground and catch people looking at me oddly and I'll realise what I'm 
holding," she says. "If I ever lost my mobile it would be really embarrassing. 
Everything on it is about bras – pictures of bras, ideas for bras ..."

Since January, 31-year-old Taylor has helped to boost the assets of a large 
chunk of middle England in her role as the lingerie and swimwear designer for 
John Lewis. From next spring, if you buy an own-brand bra from the store, it 
will have been devised by Taylor.

It's a delicate responsibility. Underwear that will appeal to Everywoman must 
be attractive, innovative, fashionable and functional. Above all, it must 
compete with that custodian of female contours, M&S. Small surprise then that, 
when most of us would spot a striking shoe in a shoe shop or a striking dress 
on a fellow commuter, Taylor will see a bra – maybe an inspiring pattern for 
one on a shoe heel or a glimpse of an unusual strap beneath the dress.

"To the average person, one lace bra looks much like another lace bra, so it's 
the tiny detail that counts," she says. "Part of the fun of design is seeing 
inspiration in everything."

Canadian-born Taylor, who designs prints and lingerie for other clients 
alongside John Lewis, grew up wanting to be a fashion designer: "I'd sit in the 
back of classes sketching dresses. But I always assumed it was more of a 
fantasy job, like being a princess or a pop star, than reality."

It became closer to reality when she enrolled on a fashion design course at 
London's Ravensbourne College and it was there, while working on placement with 
a lingerie designer for Tesco, that she discovered a fascination with 
underwear. "I've always had a strong scientific and artistic side and there was 
a tension between the two," she says. "Lingerie is all about engineering and I 
loved the challenge of reconciling that with the aesthetics of undergarments. 
It's harder to do something really different with a bra than with a dress 
because you can't change the basic shape or volume."

Despite – or perhaps because of – the fact that lingerie is hidden from public 
view Taylor reckons it can express a woman's personality more volubly than 
clothes: "You buy it because it pleases you, not because you're being dictated 
to by other people or brands. There's no peer pressure in lingerie, so it can 
be more of an indulgence."

I'm surprised by this. I've always regarded bras as tedious necessities, like 
dental floss and petrol. I still rely on the three limp grey strips with which 
my mother equipped me 15 years ago. Research by Oxfam, however, suggests that 
women collect bras as lovingly as shoes. The average woman has nine, a third of 
them unworn, and, according to Taylor, they are investing more money in each 
garment.

Unbeknown to me, therefore, bra design and technology has been evolving to 
accommodate the more discerning (and more expansive) customer. "When I started 
10 years ago, lingerie was a tiny industry and focused on young flirty wear," 
Taylor says. "It was assumed that women wanted sexy, aspirational lingerie, but 
today's women feel far more comfortable in their curves and so are going for 
the more classic look."

Meanwhile, the curves are growing considerably larger and Taylor, along with 
other designers, has had to glamorise supports for the fuller figure. "The 
double D cup is the fastest growing area," she says. "Some of the bras I work 
with are like helmets. Bigger sizes used to be very functional, designed for 
older, frumpy women, but now people want them to look attractive."

Developments in moulding and bonding technology have revolutionised her scope. 
Machines can bond and trim fabrics so smoothly that the lumps and bumps that 
would once have disfigured a tight-fitting top are eliminated and designers can 
experiment more freely.

On graduating from college, Taylor launched herself as a freelance designer 
and Tesco was among the clients that retained her services. She was approached 
by John Lewis last year via Linkedin, and now freelances for the store three 
days a week designing lingerie and swimwear for spring 2013.

The design studio is a carnival of colour at the end of long grey corridors in 
the tall grey tower that is the company's head office. Rails of rainbow-hued 
fabrics sit beside every desk and the walls behind are patchworked with 
swatches and fashion photos. "You can tell the changing seasons by the changing 
colours in the office," says Taylor.

Each designer has their own speciality, from knitwear to accessories, and 
Taylor's perch is easily identified by the gallery of bras pinned behind it. 
But when it comes to ideas there is an amiable collaboration between the desks. 
"If one person uses a particular print, we can all use it," says Taylor. "The 
kaftan and accessories designer will use the same prints as my swimwear, for 
instance, and we all have to be aware of which colours and combinations the 
others are using."

Since new ranges are designed two seasons ahead, Taylor has to predict trends 
before she can settle to her drawing board. At the start of each season, all 
the designers gather for a presentation by a trend consultant whose job is to 
research shopping patterns and shifting cultural influences. "Sometimes there's 
a movie in production or a TV series – like Coco Before Chanel – that is likely 
to influence fashion, so you have to be clued up," says Taylor, who is 
dispatched on two overseas research trips for inspiration at the start of each 
season.

"I'll look at trends in youthful beachwear in Ibiza, and for the more mature 
customer Monaco," she says. "I also visit vintage markets in New York and San 
Francisco, because sometimes you can learn from manufacturing techniques that 
have died out but might be worth reviving. You have to be ruthless. You can 
fall in love with the most beautiful garment but it's not right for the range, 
or you can find a hideous thing that has huge potential."

The root of her inspiration, however, comes from customers. "I normally build 
on the existing range so you have to understand what's been selling," says 
Taylor, who will often wait around lingerie departments watching women's 
reactions and shopping habits.

Once she has completed her research expeditions she makes a collage of 
swatches and trimmings to illustrate the styles, colours and fabrics she 
predicts will be in demand in two seasons time and shows it to the store 
buyers, who add their own feedback: "People think that if you're a designer you 
just do a little picture from your imagination, but it's all very collaborative 
work with buyers, merchandisers, suppliers and manufacturers. Next spring is 
predicted to be lighter, softer colours – so you wouldn't want a purple bra."

She then examines the hundreds of fabric samples sent in by suppliers and, 
from these, puts together a specific shape. It's in this intricate splicing of 
fabrics that the expense of a bra lies. There are more than 26 components in 
the most basic bra, more than any other garment, and over 30 stitching 
operations are required to assemble them. And although to the untutored eye, 
most bra and knicker shapes look similar, Taylor says they can be altered in 
innumerable subtle ways simply by how the seams are positioned and fabrics 
combined.

Once the contours are decided, she selects trimmings from thousands of samples 
of lace, threading and bows, sticks the chosen fabric swatches and accompanying 
trims on to a design board, and shows it to the buyers. After ideas are 
approved, a sample is run up by the manufacturer and the complex process of 
fitting – by a technical expert on a series of differently-endowed models – 
begins. Around 10% of designs are shed at this stage, leaving an average of 20 
for the new range.

Swimwear follows womenswear fashions more closely but is as much of a 
challenge as bras and pants: "The average woman feels out of her comfort zone 
with so much of herself on display in public, so the costume has to make her 
feel at ease, while at the same time being sexy and glamorous."

Her job, she says is a consuming passion and her husband has grown immune to a 
house stuffed with lingerie, and weekends hanging round lingerie shops while 
she pursues her research. Women, when they discover her profession, tend to 
share her excitement but, although their underclothes might betray their 
personality more revealingly than their outerwear, they regard underwear 
rationally, as a product. Men, however, are another matter.

"They tend to switch off when I tell them what I do, because they associate 
lingerie with sexuality and their minds start wandering to other areas," she 
says. "They assume that if you're a lingerie designer you must be thinking 
about sex all the time!"
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/02/BBC_should_replace_licence_fee_with_subscription__says_Armando_Iannucci.txt

The Thick of It creator Armando Iannucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci> has joined those calling 
on the BBC to axe the licence fee in favour of subscription and pay for 
homegrown programmes by "ruthlessly" selling itself abroad.

Iannucci, who created Alan Partridge with Steve Coogan, said the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> could "make a fortune" by switching to 
a subscription model.

He said the corporation was on "cracking form", flagging up shows such as 
Gillian Anderson drama The Fall, James Corden's The Wrong Mans and BBC3's 
supernatural offering In The Flesh.

"The BBC would make a fortune if it ran as a subscription service abroad. It's 
revered across the world, and rightly so,"Iannucci said on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Aiannucci/status/473753108045398016>.

"Money made from subscriptions abroad would fund even better programmes at 
home and take pressure off falling licence fee collection.

"If the international model works, BBC could replace licence fee at home with 
a subscription fee, set lower than current licence fee."

He added: "Current exemptions would still apply. So no one would pay more for 
a subscription than they do now for a TV licence.

"The subscription would give you access to BBC archive too. We'd get a quality 
service at home, by ruthlessly selling ourselves abroad.

"Having lived abroad, I know many people (expats and locals) who would pay to 
access the BBC abroad (iPlayer PPV access)."

Iannucci spoke out on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Aiannucci> after he said in 
aLondon Evening Standard interview 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/london-life/armando-iannucci-veep-the-beeb-and-i-9470171.html>
 published on Monday that the licence fee model was being outmoded by the 
changing way people are watching television.

"The BBC should make a mint from the brand internationally. It needs a new 
attitude that says it's not filthy to make money," he said.

"As for the licence, you have people on laptops saying: 'What is a 
television?' There will be a subscription model."

He echoed his criticism of the BBC in his Bafta lecture two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/10/armando-iannucci-bbc-fight-critics>
, when he said the corporation had to be more gung-ho in taking on its critics.

He also said the BBC was not as bold as commercial rivals such as US cable 
networkHBO <https://www.theguardian.com/media/hbo>, for whom he makes political 
satire, Veep.

"HBO is on the side of the creative. It is a bit like how the BBC was 10 or 15 
years ago when they said, 'Oh yes, we trust you,'" Iannucci told the Standard.

"The BBC lost that with competition from Sky and Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> and started hiving off the 
commissioning side from the programming side.

"People were making decisions who hadn't come up through programming. But I'm 
optimistic now that, because Sky and Netflix and Amazon andYouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> are putting money in, people 
who make stuff are realising there's more than one game in town."

On the BBC's response to the recent controversy over Jeremy Clarkson, Iannucci 
said: "There is a lot of headless chickening going on. I will man the 
barricades for the BBC, they have been good to me, but they have a tendency 
when accused of a crime just to hand themselves into the police station.

"What is the worst that could happen if they were rude to the Daily Mail?"

Iannucci first called on the BBC to launch an HBO-style subscription channel 
in 2008 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/aug/25/bbc.television>.

His comments come with the future of the BBC and its funding up for grabs in 
the run-up to licence renewal in 2016. MPs have said the £145.50 charge could 
be decriminalised, a prospect that has been fiercely criticised by the BBC 
which said it could cost it up to £200m in funding.

Overseas viewers already pay for BBC programmes on the iPlayer, an annual pass 
for the global iPlayer costing as little as £52 a year.

The BBC's director of strategy and digital James Purnell has warned against 
any move to introduce subscription payments, saying it would lead to "first- 
and second-class" licence fee payers and cost £500m to implement.

"You get into first- and second-class licence fee payers, you would be taking 
stuff away from people which they value,"he said in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/13/bbc-strategy-subscription-payments-licence-fee>
. "You would only be reducing the licence fee by £10 or £20."

He added: "We don't think [subscription] would be simple at all. There are 40m 
Freeview sets out there, you would have to visit all of those. You'd have to 
put conditional access on them, give them subscription cards, and that would 
cost £500m.

"We think the overall system would be more expensive to run than the licence 
fee, and we think that would be significantly worse than the current system."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/02/Is_M_S_s_pre_cut_avocado_a_convenience_too_far_.txt

It’s absurd to feel jealous of a fruit, but I have to admit to a small stab of 
envy to see how lovingly cossetedMarks & Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marksspencer>’s mangoes are. Or at least 
one variety the store is currently stocking: a nam dok mai mango. It sits, cosy 
in its rigid plastic shell, and is wearing what appears to be a fetching 
bright-yellow knitted jumper, doubled over for extra warmth and coddling. I 
feel sad for the second-tier mangoes on the shelf beneath, naked of sweaters or 
shells, jumbled and bumping into each other.

But it’s not M&S’s mango that is the subject of minor emissions of outrage on 
social media, though – that target would be its pre-chopped avocado. “Customers 
love an avocado, but they’re sometimes not the easiest to prepare,” said M&S 
product developer Erica Molyneaux. “So we’ve done the messy bit for them and 
created a ready sliced, fully ripened option.”

Cutting is a struggle for many people, including those with arthritis and 
other difficulties with mobility

“M&S starts selling pre-sliced avocado, because cutting is a struggle,” goes 
the sarcastic headline 
<http://mashable.com/2016/04/25/presliced-avocado-marks-and-spencer/?utm_cid=mash-com-Tw-main-link#9Edwr5QQmEq5>
, forgetting that cutting is indeed a struggle for many people, including those 
with arthritis and other difficulties with mobility. That aside, it’s hard to 
feel too angry about pre-sliced avocado when we’ve long had pre-torn lettuce 
leaves, pre-diced fruit salad or pre-spiralised and chopped vegetables. Or 
peeled, hard-boiled eggs in plastic pots at sandwich chains. Or, indeed, 
pre-prepared sandwiches.
 Whole Foods removed ready-peeled oranges from its shelves after social  
<http://mashable.com/2016/03/04/orange-packaging-twitter/#MX_ZL4ccmsq3>media 
indignation. Photograph: Nathalie Gordon 
But about 5m tons of packaging goes through UK households every year and, yes, 
most people can probably survive without pre-cut avocado in a plastic pot. 
There was enoughsocial media indignation about peeled oranges 
<http://mashable.com/2016/03/04/orange-packaging-twitter/#MX_ZL4ccmsq3> sold in 
a plastic tub to get Whole Foods to remove them from its shelves. The same 
happened after people complained aboutpre-peeled bananas 
<http://gawker.com/5945973/common-sense-supermarket-chain-sells-pre-peeled-bananas-wrapped-in-plastic>
 sold in a shrink-wrapped plastic tray at a supermarket in Austria.

Despite first appearances, packaging is not always a crime. A plastic-wrapped 
cucumber, for instance, lasts three times longer than one sold without, and 
bags of potatoes and grapes sold by the supermarket Morrisons have led toless 
waste in store 
<http://your.morrisons.com/Home-New/Corporate/Media-centre/Corporate-news/Morrisons-launch-Great-Taste-Less-Waste-campaign-to-save-families-up-to-600-per-year-/>
 (previously, odd small bunches of grapes or single potatoes would get thrown 
away).

Packaging can help prevent food waste, and food waste is said to be at least 
10 times more damaging to the environment than packaging waste. Is it worth 
taking a hit on packaging to prevent food from spoiling and being thrown away? 
Nobody fromWrap <http://www.wrap.org.uk/>, the sustainability organisation, 
which does a lot of work on packaging, was available to say. Still, it’s hard 
to reconcile that idea when you see a single mango in a foam sweater, or – 
perhaps even worse, and spotted again at M&S – a four-pack of pears, nestled in 
a tray, with a hard plastic shield on top. The whole thing was wrapped in 
another layer of plastic.

 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/02/Let_me_entertain_you.txt

 One of classical music's greatest evangelists believes there's no difference 
between "high art" and popular entertainment. One of ballet's greatest 
enthusiasts runs his empire from New Barnet, and wants to persuade us that 
Carmen is as much fun as Cats.

Raymond Gubbay has quite possibly done more than anyone else in the UK to 
bring "higher" art forms to the masses. His 1998 production of Madame Butterfly 
was seen by 80,000 people; the "Classical Spectacular" series of concerts at 
London's Albert Hall have played to packed houses twice annually for 14 years. 
Not that he thinks there's anything "higher" about what he does.

"It's all about entertaining people. The distinction between "high" and "low" 
art is an artificial barrier. People go to be entertained whether it's a 
so-called art form or whether it's popular entertainment."

He snorts at the idea that the widely discussed dumbing down syndrome has hit 
classical music and opera hard. "I don't see any evidence for that." For 
Gubbay, it's all a matter of image.

"You need to go out and give people the message that what they're going to see 
is above all good. It's going to be spectacular in our case, and it's going to 
be a very special experience. And that's what you are really selling: something 
that's going to be, if not unique, then very special."

He cites the Royal Opera House as a lesson in how not to attract audiences: 
earlier this year top-price tickets to a 90-minute opera by Hans Werner Henze 
were over £100.

"That seems to me the craziest way of doing it," says Gubbay, famed as one of 
Covent Garden's most persistent critics. "If you're going to put on a 
contemporary opera then at least present it in the best possible circumstances. 
So if it's going to be short then have a seat price that's reflective of that, 
and encourage people to come in for a great experience."

The impresario can normally be relied on for a few well-aimed left hooks at 
the Opera House. But today he acknowledges that the remit of subsidised arts 
organisations is different from that of a commercial producer and promoter, and 
insists that the two should work side by side.

"Nobody has their own exclusive audience. There is an audience out there 
wanting to be brought in and you have to attract that audience in; you have to 
build new audiences."

But where's this new audience to come from? Most of my 30-something 
contemporaries, I point out, have grown up with Radio 1. Old music for us is 
vintage Beatles, and classical music is perceived as "difficult" and 
unapproachable.

Gubbay blames the government. The gradual disappearance of free music tuition 
in schools is "disgraceful" - people are no longer being given the opportunity 
to realise "the sheer joy of music making".

Not that the arts establishment helps. "Sometimes it takes such a narrow view 
of itself that it limits the audience it's appealing to. We've had in the past 
a prime example of that with the Opera House where they have limited it by 
image, price and perception."

He cites the cultural buzz in cities such as Birmingham, or the success of 
Tate Modern as evidence of "public subsidy really working".

"The Tate has put out a message that it's somewhere exciting and accessible. 
It's ironic it opened the year the Millennium Dome was falling flat on its 
face. Now that was a case of huge amount of public money just wasted."

Last month, Gubbay collected a CBE. It will sit nicely alongside his honorary 
music fellowships ("God knows why") from the Royal Academy of Music and Trinity 
College of Music. Are you in danger of becoming respectable and part of the 
establishment? I tease.

"It's something I really am quite nervous about," he admits, before adding, 
with relish: "You have to be a bit outrageous and challenging sometimes. 
Perhaps I was given it to shut me up. BUT I'M NOT GOING TO." I hope he doesn't.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/02/The_Indy_may_find_digital_isn_t_easy_when_you_re_a_paper_born_for_print.txt

Three things, only one week later, need saying about the Independent’s change 
of life. Let’s politely call them three dodgy propositions, and avoid mixing 
too much snake oil with the hogwash.

Thus far, the simple assumption of Indy transition has been eagerly grasped by 
a doleful chorus of pundits. Well, it’s obvious isn’t it? Goodbye news in 
print, ageing info pounded by heavy metal presses and carried in lorry-load 
bundles around the land; hello news on the screen in your back pocket. No 
diesel fumes or sweaty labour. Let the death rattles sound.

Evgeny Lebedev almost set this thesis to music 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/media/press/the-independent-becomes-the-first-national-newspaper-to-embrace-a-global-digital-only-future-a6869736.html>
. “The newspaper industry is changing, and that change is being driven by 
readers. They’re showing us that the future is digital… My family bought and 
invested heavily in theIndependent because we believe in world-class quality 
journalism, and this move secures the future of these vitally important 
editorial values.”

But it wasn’t digital that killed Indy ambitions through the 90s and 00s when 
David Montgomery and Tony O’Reilly picked up the tab. It was lack of a stable 
ownership with stable resources. It was grinding losses that refused to come 
down. And now, with those losses finally edging closer to break even, with the 
long struggle at last availing, what do the Lebedevs (and their shrewd, newish 
chief executive, Steve Auckland) do?

They sell the print i that helped turn things around – especially once the 
cover price was jacked up to 40p. They proclaim a global digital future, with 
more reporters to be appointed all over the world, but they pick up the £24m 
Johnston Press paid them and aim to spend it giving away the printEvening 
Standard (not turning it into a digital miracle) and making their London TV 
franchise less of a black hole. Global vision, in short, stops short at the 
M25. Transition doesn’t make it across Kensington High Street. Feet stay firmly 
on the ground.

The Indy and Sindy depended on the i for salvation. When Lebedev reached for 
his scissors, that all fell apart. Of course you can’t blame the Lebedevs for 
cutting and selling. They don’t own Chelsea FC; they’re good Samaritans who 
need hard cash. But the choices they’re making are basic terrestrial stuff, not 
some genius jump into a rose-tinted future.

And let’s – dodgy proposition two – dissect that future. We know what the BBC 
World Service is made of: more than 30 different language sections. We know 
what BBC Worldwide or CNN provide: discrete programmes and news bulletins for 
different parts of the world. That’s because, as a generalisation, “all news is 
local” (the Johnston Press motto, ironically enough).

Not always quite true, perhaps. Some news has a world dimension: a Syrian 
ceasefire, the death of David Bowie, a baby for Kim Kardashian, another bad day 
for Louis van Gaal. Big wars, big celebs and big football have international 
currency. But the detail of country coverage is local coverage: the election 
campaign on your patch, the council debates, the corrupt deals, the doctors on 
strike – news that won’t make it across national borders, but matters hugely 
inside them.

That’s why the New York Times, for all its pomp and circumstance, is starting 
editions for Latin America as well as Europe, and hiring reporters in places 
like Detroit and Atlanta so it can give home and front pages a local twist. 
That’s why Mail Online has added scores of reporters in America and Australia – 
because faraway places need stories about themselves above and beyond pictures 
of bikini models. That’s why theGuardian has complete coverage teams in New 
York and Sydney. “International” operation doesn’t mean a correspondent or two 
and a few cheap freelances: it means spending money you’ll find hard to get 
back.

“The unique editorial proposition of the Independent is perfectly suited to 
the global digital landscape,” says chief executive Auckland. “Following our 
decisive move to digital, we will be as focused and uncompromised as any 
startup, but with all the authority and trust of an established news brand – a 
truly unique proposition.” Sorry, Steve, but the hogwash won’t go away.

A print newspaper (say the Indy) has a familiar structure: news home and away, 
opinion, cartoons, pictures, puzzles, the arts, business and sport. It’s a 
complete, familiar package. It aims to offer a bit or a lot of everything, at a 
price. But sample the sport in Vice, BuzzFeed or the Huffington Post. It’s 
vestigial – or pathetically worse. The dominant news sites that don’t stem from 
newsprint pick, choose and leave masses out. If you want proper sports 
coverage, try a newspaper website instead.

Online selects and neglects. Online doesn’t do whole packages. Online, in 
truth, doesn’t need them – because the missing coverage you seek is only a 
click away. Online is endemically promiscuous. If print newspapers didn’t 
exist, you sometimes think, no one would think of inventing them digitally.

What evolves next may be change beyond banal assumption: an explosion of 
discrete, often paid-for, news brands you can blend to your taste: a truly 
unique proposition. Which is why magazines are doing so well. But theIndy, 
voyaging out alone with a bit of everything? Good luck and good fortune: but 
don’t think that this – or BBC3’s parallel transition online – is a bold, 
decisive step. On the contrary, it’s dodgy proposition three: making the best 
cover story of a bad job.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/02/Vampire_hunting_in_New_Orleans.txt

On Chestnut and First, in the Garden District of New Orleans, stands a 
handsome Greek revival mansion with Ionic and Corinthian columns and arches of 
ornate, lacy ironwork. Until a few years ago, it was the home ofAnne Rice 
<http://www.annerice.com/>, high priestess of popular vampiric fiction and 
author ofInterview with the Vampire 
<http://www.randomhouse.com/catalog/display.pperl?isbn=9780345409645&view=excerpt>
, who, more than anyone, is responsible for making the Crescent City a tourist 
mecca for willingly gullible devotees of spookiness and the supernatural.

Rice assumed the role of Queen of the Night with brio: she would turn up to 
book signings in a quilted coffin, and once staged her own mock funeral at 
Lafayette Cemetery No 1, complete with horse-drawn hearse and a brass band 
playing dirges. She opened her elegant home to the public every Monday, and 
adoring fans clad in black would queue around the block to see the macabre 
artefacts it was stuffed with, including a lemur skeleton and a collection of 
evil-looking antique dolls, set out in rooms painted mauve and fuschia.

Guides offering tours to "Haunted New Orleans", who built their itineraries 
around a visit to Rice's mansion, were decidedly glum when the writer left the 
city five years ago, just beforeKatrina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hurricanekatrina> hit. She is, after all, 
one of the world's bestselling authors, and her feverish page-turners brought 
in hordes of visitors eager to experience the city's gothic atmospherics, along 
with its celebrated Creole food and jazz. This year, First Street offered 
rather more pedestrian fare in the run-up to Halloween: when I walked around 
the Garden District – it's an unmissable part of the city – a fortnight ago, I 
saw only pumpkins, plastic skulls hanging from porches, and the odd 
Frankenstein's monster tied to a tree.

Of course, the gothic atmospherics long antedated Rice, and she looked to them 
for inspiration. Interview with the Vampire begins with the story of one of the 
Louisiana indigo plantations not far from the city, characterised by humid 
swamp lands and gnarled oaks dripping with Spanish moss. But the action soon 
moves to the old city – the French Quarter, still largely preserved – and its 
streets of Creole cottages and colonial villas, with their battered shutters 
and secluded courtyards. A port historically charged with voodoo magic (thanks 
to the slave trade) and heavy with Catholic mysticism (from generations of 
European immigrants), suggested all too obviously blood-spilling of a vampiric 
kind. And a city long identified with sexual permissiveness was a plausible 
home for dashing, irresistible throat-piercers.

Rice's revenant heroes roam the extraordinary St Louis and Lafayette 
<http://lafayettecemetery.org/> cemeteries, which, however many sightseers 
crowd them, still resemble Hammer horror film sets. The crumbling, sun-bleached 
tombs are, unusually, above ground (the water table is so high, bodies buried 
in the normal way always floated back to the surface). So the Spanish-style 
vaults in these "cities of the dead" are reusable, and house many sets of 
remains within them. There's lots of rusting decorative ironwork; the pathways 
between the crypts are narrow and twisting; crosses and statues on top of the 
tombs cast odd shadows across the necropolis; and votive candles add the final 
touch.

Rice lovingly traded on the evocative architecture and sexy Southern exoticism 
of one of the oldest cities in America. "This was New Orleans," begins a 
passage in her most famous novel, "a magical and magnificent place to live. In 
which a vampire, richly dressed and gracefully walking through the pools of 
light of one gas lamp after another might attract no more notice in the evening 
than hundreds of other exotic creatures . . ."

Now a new set of Louisiana vampires has come along to entice bloodsucking 
devotees to the New Orleans area.True Blood 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0844441/>, the hit TV series which has attracted 
five million viewers in the States (it's currently showing on Channel 4 in the 
UK), is based on the Sookie Stackhouse novels ofCharlaine Harris 
<http://www.charlaineharris.com/>, which has as its premise the entering of the 
vamps into mainstream society – thanks to the availability of Japanese-made 
synthetic blood they have "come out of the casket". In the opening paragraph of 
the first Sookie book, Dead Until Dark, we hear of the exciting arrival of the 
first revenants in the fictional backwoods town of Bon Temps, Louisiana. New 
Orleans, meanwhile, is "a real centre" for vampires with "the whole Anne Rice 
thing, right?"

Alan Ball, the creator of True Blood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/true-blood>, whose previous work 
includes Six Feet Under, has described his new show as "bubblegum TV" (anyone 
talking of it in the same terms as other HBO shows such as The Sopranos or The 
Wire has let the bayou humidity go to their head). But it is fun and raunchy 
and knowing: we see a newspaper headline that announces "Angelina adopts 
Vampire Baby". The fanged hero, civil war veteran Bill Compton, seduces Sookie, 
another reworking of Bram Stoker's virginal Mina Harker – on the night she 
succumbs she wears a white nightgown with flowing sleeves.

Ball plays around with vampires as metaphor – his seductive revenants are 
clearly stand-ins for gay people (the opening credit sequence features a sign 
that reads "God Hates Fangs", a play on the Kansas City-basedWestboro Baptist 
Church 
<http://browse.theguardian.com/search?search=Westboro+Baptist+Church&sort=relevance&Ntk=MultiWordSearch&sitesearch-radio=guardian&go-guardian=Search>
 slogan "God Hates Fags"), and those who enjoy being bitten by a vampire during 
sex are castigated as "fang-bangers". The vampires are a persecuted minority 
fighting for integration and civil rights – they are outsiders, the staple of 
teenage fiction. In True Blood, it has become illegal to "drain" vampires of 
their blood which, when drunk by ordinary mortals, is a potent hallucinogen and 
aphrodisiac, nicknamed "V".

Such is the show's success, it won't be long before there are "fangtastic" 
tours to Clinton, the small Louisiana town around 50 miles from New Orleans 
where much of True Blood is filmed (I drove there, and there's little to see at 
present). This Halloween weekend, New Orleans plays host to aVampire film 
festival 
<http://www.vampirefilmfestival.com/Vampire_Film_Festival%3A_New_Orleans_Vampire_Fest.html>
, and the bloodsuckers aren't likely to disappear any time soon. There's 
intense rivalry between businesses selling haunted history trips and 
"spooktaculars" in the city, and the locals are understandably keen, following 
Katrina, to do all they can to attract visitors: better fictional horrors than 
real ones, and better ghost stories than actual memories of a ghost town.

Over the years such stories have been told, retold and blithely fabricated to 
feed the public's appetite for escapism with a ghoulish theme. The legend most 
excitedly recycled by my guide at the St Louis cemetery, for instance, is of
Marie Laveau <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marie_Laveau>, the Creole "voodoo 
queen", whose crypt there is, reportedly, the second-most visited grave in the 
US (after Elvis's but ahead of JFK's). The tomb is covered in sets of three 
"X"s, drawn or scratched on by visitors to represent wishes they hope the famed 
sorceress will grant.

The story goes that Laveau, who was alive in the 1800s and worked as a 
hairdresser to rich, white families, would stage ceremonies in which the 
participants would be possessed by spirits and dance naked. She told fortunes 
and healed the sick, dispensing charms and potions called gris-gris. When she 
finally died in 1881, aged almost 80, legend has it she turned herself into a 
huge black crow that still flies over the cemetery (though, in truth, it's 
doubtful she's buried there at all).

There are, naturally, voodoo shops in the French Quarter that sell gris-gris, 
statues, fetishes, incense and masks. And all over the city, the supernatural 
is a selling point. Ghosts bring in dollars as surely asMardi Gras 
<http://www.mardigrasneworleans.com/> and every hotel seems to have a ghost. The
Monteleone <http://www.hotelmonteleone.com/history/index.cfm>, an august 
establishment on Royal Street, boasts a number of spectres and poltergeists – 
not least one that keeps opening a locked door. Sure enough, on my first 
morning there, the story was doing the rounds that a ghostly boy had been 
sighted the previous night, sitting on some steps on the 14th floor. When a 
guest tried to take his photo, all that was captured by her camera was a black, 
formless shape.

Guides stopping outside the three-storey LaLaurie mansion further down Royal 
tell a grisly tale of cruelty to slaves in the mid-19th century. Madame 
LaLaurie was a prominent figure in the town and hosted many parties in her 
lavish residence. But rumours began to spread about the unhealthy appearance 
and the disappearance of her household servants and slaves. A young girl was 
chased on to the roof and fell to her death; she was buried underneath the 
cypress tree in the courtyard. Then a fire broke out in the mansion and 
rescuers discovered evidence that servants had been chained up and maltreated. 
Madame LaLaurie fled the city. Even more lurid details, which add spice to this 
story of "the most haunted house in New Orleans" – women nailed to floors, 
makeshift sex-change operations, and so on – turn out to have been the 
invention of the owner of one of the local ghost-tour businesses.

And the house with "the most ghosts in America"? Two hours outside the city, 
in St Francisville, beyond Baton Rouge, is theMyrtles Plantation 
<http://www.myrtlesplantation.com/> house, built in 1796. An engaging guide, 
Robi, makes the most of shlocky legends of vanishing jewellery, footsteps on 
the stairs and trapped spirits in a mirror: see the handprints, see the streaks 
of ... what? Blood? Mississippi river water? The bed and breakfasters who lodge 
upstairs, we're assured, rarely make it through the night. It's all down to the 
cruelty of an antebellum owner of the house, Clark Woodruff, who forced a 
slave, Chloe, to become his mistress then put her to death as a punishment for 
eavesdropping. In revenge, she is said to have killed off Woodruff's wife and 
daughters. That there's no record of Woodruff owning any slaves, and that his 
family, in fact, died of yellow fever is of no consequence – the phantoms 
provide the frisson.

I was expecting a certain frisson myself when I sank into the plush red 
cushions of the darkened séance lounge ofMuriel's Jackson Square 
<http://www.muriels.com/html/home.html>, in the French Quarter, for my first 
ever tarot reading. Behind heavy, tassled curtains, a couple of Egyptian 
mummies looked on. In hindsight, I realise I was expecting too much – Jane 
Seymour's Solitaire in Live and Let Die, to be specific. Instead, my psychic 
had the benign and tingle-free demeanour of a National Trust volunteer. I drew 
three initial cards, Knight in Cups, Emperor and Happiness, and listened as my 
Louisiana Mystic Meg gently, and extremely vaguely, explained their many 
possible meanings.

So, disappointingly, no ghosts or vampires made themselves known to me in New 
Orleans, though – in keeping with local tradition – I became pleasantly 
familiar with spirits of another kind (special mention goes to the brandy milk 
punch atBrennan's <http://www.brennansneworleans.com/>). In truth, the long 
history of the city is fascinating enough without it being haunted and without 
a vampire lurking in every shadow; there's plenty of genuine gothic to go 
around. And a bowl of gumbo ya ya, followed by a night of music on Frenchman 
Street, is intoxication enough for me – at least, that is, until I can get hold 
of some "V".

Getting there
KLM <http://www.klm.com/travel/gb_en/index_default.html> (+44 (0) 871 222 
7474) flies to New Orleans, via Amsterdam, from 15 UK airports from £434 rtn 
inc tax.

Where to stay 
Hotel Monteleone <http://www.hotelmonteleone.com> (+1 866 338 4684) has 
doubles from $99-$239, room only.

Further information 
True Blood season one is out on DVD and Blu-Rayfrom HBO 
<http://www.hbo.com/trueblood>.
New Orleans' Convention & Visitors Bureau <http://www.neworleanscvb.com>.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/04/Barney_Francis___Football_punditry_is_an_absolute_art_form_.txt

"I don't suppose you know the dates of the Chechnyan close season?" asks the 
Sky Sports <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-sports> managing director, 
Barney Francis, only half in jest, as he ponders whether he might be able to 
tempt Ruud Gullit back from Grozny for a few punditry slots.

It is an altogether happier dilemma than the one he faced during a wild week 
in January. Then, he was at the centre of a media maelstrom that spiralled from 
off-colour, off-camera comments about a female linesman into a furious row 
about sexism in sport that ended in the departure of the broadcaster's two 
biggest names.

More than that, it came as Sky Sports was gearing up to celebrate 20 years 
during which all agree it has changed the face of sport and the way we watch 
it. That backslapping exercise was rather undermined by the fact thatRichard 
Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> and Andy Gray – those 
self-confessed "boorish and bullish guys" – personified that success.

Looking back now, from the third floor of an expensive new Sky Sports studio 
complex that towers over the tatty sprawl of warehouses that have housed it to 
date, Francis is happy with the way he handled the issue.

"For us, we had a problem and we had to deal with it and crack on. The 
football season wasn't going to wait," says Francis, giving his side of the 
story for the first time. He says it was "a tough time" and "no one enjoyed the 
week less than I did."

It was said that on his appointment Francis had tried to challenge the laddish 
culture that existed at Sky Sports, particularly within the football department 
and most insidiously around Keys and Gray.

"That's giving me far too much credit. If you stand in the pub with a group of 
football fans and a group of cricket fans, the football fans are going to be 
more boisterous," he says.

"The football department is naturally a more boisterous area. But once it 
became clear a mark had been overstepped, we had to take clear and decisive 
action."

And he insists there is no residue of bullying or sexism at the broadcaster. 
"It didn't run as deeply as some of the people who were asked the question 
[claimed]. Over 20 years, if it had been such a major problem a lot of people 
would have walked out and that wasn't the case. People love working here and 
continue to."

The departure of Keys and Gray became inevitable amid the continued emergence 
of new tapes from inside the building showing ever more shocking examples of 
off-camera misogyny. Francis claims they never got to the bottom of who was 
leaking them.

"In these days of computer files and generic logins, it became impossible to 
take it beyond a certain point. I'll confess that wasn't the focus."

And as the old football cliche goes, no player is bigger than the team. 
Ratings have actually gone up since Keys and Gray left, with five of Sky's 10 
best ever rating matches screened this season.

Graeme Souness in particular has appeared to thrive, while Jamie Redknapp has 
grown in stature and Jeff Stelling and Ben Shepherd, among others, have taken 
their chance in the presenter's chair. "Football punditry is an absolute art 
form and I'm not sure people give it enough credit. I've been impressed with 
everyone we've tried."

Next year, Gary Neville will join the team and is sure to divide opinion. 
Francis says he knows he'll have to put his loyalties to one side. "He's not 
going to be shy of passing comment on his team-mates. We know he's got great 
insight and we're pretty sure that over time he'll flourish," he says.

The likeable but ambitious 39-year-old is keen to emphasise how Sky Sports has 
changed, but in common with most of his colleagues also exhibits a pride – 
bordering on defensiveness – in working there.

Francis returned to Sky from the BBC in 1999 and made his reputation producing 
its cricket coverage and then moving on to its footballing crown jewels of 
Premier League and Champions League. He got the top job in 2009 when the 
long-serving Vic Wakeling retired.

Francis has paid his dues on the road and won plaudits for overseeing the 
introduction of domestic Test cricket to the schedules at a time when the 
England and Wales Cricket Board's decision to sell its rights exclusively to 
Sky was under extreme scrutiny.

An enthusiastic club cricketer himself, he points to the balance between 
Nasser Hussain, David Gower, Ian Botham, Bumble and co to demonstrate the 
importance of chemistry between the on-screen talent and the viewer.

"There's a warmth and a humour. The individual parts are strong and the 
collective absolutely flourishes. At the key moments, they're not shy of 
calling it as they see it."

But as important as the presentation is, in sport content is king. A glance at 
the Sky Sports schedule from 20 years ago – highlights included a repeat of the 
Leyland DAF final – is enough to confirm that. It was securing exclusive rights 
to top-flight football in 1992 that transformed Sky's fortunes and while the 
range has broadened to fill four HD channels and a 24-hour news service, 
retaining its top draws is key.

Francis toes the company line in refusing to be drawn into speculating whether 
the BBC's cost-cutting might make the Six Nations rugby or Formula One an 
appealing prospect.

Nor will he admit to any conversations about Formula One's ownership, should 
News Corp's embryonic bid pick up pace. "All I know is what you write about it. 
And from what I read, CVC aren't selling," he says, not entirely convincingly.

Instead, he prefers to reel off a list of recent renewals – Champions League, 
Football League, US PGA golf, ATP Tour tennis, Euro 2012 qualifiers – to 
underline the breadth and depth of its appeal.

That Football League deal, a significant reduction on the previous one, 
renewed fears that Sky's dominance might lead to a dip in revenues for sport. 
Industry theories abound that the relationship between Sky and ESPN is a bit 
too cosy to engender real competition, but Francis is having none of it.

"Everyone is rival. It's an open bidding process and you all go for whatever 
you think is good for your business," he insists.

The Premier League deal is up in 2013 and Francis says Sky is keeping a close 
eye on the regulatory issues surrounding it, from the Portsmouth landlady case 
that could blow apart the way rights are sold to Ofcom's oversight of the pay 
TV market. But he returns to cricket to demonstrate the extent to which he 
believes Sky acts as a force for good for sport.

"My club up in Hertfordshire has seven teams on a Saturday. I can't get my kid 
into our Sunday morning coaching, I'm on the waiting list," he says. "When I 
drive past my club and see all these kids out there and see how successful the 
elite England men's team is, how successful the women's team is – they're all 
centrally contracted, they no longer have to wash their own kits – it backs up 
our decision all those years ago to invest in Test cricket."

That argument is less easy to sustain in football, where Sky's billions have 
flowed into the pockets of players, agents and luxury car dealers. But that 
does not stop him trying, arguing facilities have also improved and citing the 
inspirational effect of so much televised football on young players.

One sport he believes needs to take a long look at itself is boxing, after he 
recently pulled an Amir Khan pay-per-view fight from the schedule because the 
undercard was too weak.

"Boxing needs to sort itself out and the best fighters need to fight the best 
fighters. The punters and the broadcasters are sick of seeing some of the guys 
that are appearing on the right side of the bill," he says.

As Sky has grown into a behemoth on course for an annual operating profit of 
over £1bn, it has sought to soften its image and broaden its appeal. This has 
extended to sport as well, where it has been intimately involved in the British 
cycling success story of marrying elite success with increased participation.

That is one way in which Sky Sports will try and grab a piece of the Olympics 
action, despite not holding any broadcast rights. Sky Sports News will 
broadcast extensively from the site and Francis argues that a successful Games 
will be good for the broadcaster.

"As we sit here looking to 2012, we've got a fantastic sporting year ahead and 
we're a sports channel so we can't be anything other than excited about it," he 
says. And he will confess that Sky would "of course" look at the possibility of 
acquiring rights to the Olympics if the opportunity came up.

Touring the new digital studios, he enthuses about the expansion in its 3D 
coverage and shows off the hi-tech new Sky Sports News set. The Ashes in 
Australia also demonstrated the way in which viewing is changing, he says, with 
a huge spike in viewing on laptops, iPads and mobile phones during the series. 
Chelsea v Manchester United in March was watched by 20,000 viewers live on 
their mobiles and 100,000 on laptops or iPads.

The new five-floor studio symbolises for Francis a broadcaster that has come 
of age in its 21st year. But he insists some things won't change, that it will 
retain the restless energy that has fuelled a growth that has made it – for 
good or ill – perhaps the most powerful company in modern British sport.

"As you walk around the Sky Sports offices, everyone is a huge sports fan. If 
they weren't working here they'd be sitting at home watching it," he says.

"The people who make the shows would never allow us to become the 
establishment. It's a rotten job for your social life. But I wouldn't want it 
any other way, because it's such a fabulous place to work."
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/04/Complementary_medicines_review_calls_for_stricter_labelling_in_Australia.txt

A landmark review has called for stricter labelling and more rigorous testing 
of complementary medicines in Australia.


The independent Review of Medicines and Medical Devices Regulation report 
recommends that the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) step up its random 
testing of complementary medicines listed on the register of therapeutic goods 
amid high levels of non-compliance.


Edzard Ernst: outspoken professor of complementary medicine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/oct/19/edzard-ernst-outspoken-professor-of-complementary-medicine>
It says the medicines regulator should be authorised to refuse to list 
complementary medicines and wants companies to be restricted in what claims 
they can make about their products, recommending a set list be devised to curb 
unsubstantiated claims.


The report, released by the Department of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> on Friday, says one in four 
products selected for random review in 2014, and 61% subjected to targeted 
reviews, were in breach of regulatory requirements.


Compliance monitoring is low, penalties are insufficient and companies can 
just withdraw a product once notified of a review, forcing the review to be 
terminated.


The report recommends the TGA step up the number of reviews it conducts, 
publish the results for consumers and be allowed to complete reviews even if 
the product is subsequently withdrawn.


Australians are increasingly self-medicating and using complementary medicines 
including vitamins to manage their health, “predicated on the assumption that 
all therapeutic products on the Australian market have been assessed for 
safety, quality and efficacy”.


But low-risk medicines can obtain market approval without any pre-market 
assessment by the TGA, with sponsors allowed to self-declare that their product 
is compliant.


Vitamins take Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/11/vitamins-take-australia-hollywood-names>
The report recommends three new options for sponsors to have their medicines 
listed on the register: the existing self-declaration that the medicine is 
compliant; self-declaration and TGA assessment of the product’s efficacy; and 
registration by the TGA for higher risk complementary medicines.


Under option one, sponsors would need to put a prominent disclaimer on all 
promotional materials and online that their efficacy claims had not been 
independently assessed, or were based on traditional use.


The report recommends all sponsors be required to publish online any evidence 
to support claims about the complementary medicines they are selling.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/04/For_long_copy_to_flourish_again_it_needs_investment_by_the_advertising__industry.txt

I recently read an article entitled Who Killed Long Copy 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/news/1309220/>. It was an excerpt from Read me: 
Ten Lessons on Creating Great Copy 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Read-Me-Lessons-Writing-Great/dp/1780673485>. There 
was a sentence that really made me think: “It’s ironic that the one place where 
long copy really has fallen out of favour is advertising, the industry that 
invented copywriting in the first place.”

I work at OgilvyOne. David Ogilvy was the daddy of long copy; his Man in the 
Hathaway shirt <http://waxwanedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2012/09/mhs.jpeg> and 
theMan from Schweppes is here 
<http://media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/originals/bf/44/3d/bf443de07a4844b21dfe0280183d84fe.jpg>
 are two of the most iconic long copy ads ever written.

So are we continuing his legacy today? Yes, is the short copy answer. The 
advertising industry has evolved, as consumer habits and media consumption 
have. The good agencies and the good copywriters are still writing beautiful 
and engaging long copy. But it’s in the form of letters, emails and 
well-crafted online content, telling a bigger, on-going story that lives and 
grows over time, through multiple touch points, across a customer’s entire 
relationship with a brand.  

But just because long copy is still used doesn’t mean this once integral tool 
of the marketing arsenal is thriving.

From my perspective, as someone who runs an agency, it is definitely getting 
harder to find people who can come up with engaging ideas and then craft the 
copy that fills those ideas. 

The main cause of this has to be in our education system. Add in a societal 
shift from the days when the media set a good example (now it seems good 
grammar is a bad thing) and a lack of time for anything other than “snackable” 
content, and this has contributed to the view that long copy ads have become 
old-fashioned. Creativity has come to be associated with brevity and a belief 
in advertising, that all persuasion should reside in a single proposition, 
usually expressed in a sentence. And that this single thought, if continuously 
repeated in some creative form, will do 100% of the job of selling. 

But this sits at odds with us. We are after all a social species; we need 
stories not only to encourage us to buy something, but to explain to our 
friends why we are clever to buy it. Reading, is a very late evolutionary 
development among humans, but talking and storytelling are millions of years 
old. They are what make us human. Cavemen would gather around camp-fires to 
exchange stories, the Greeks revelled in the myths of ancient heroes and gods – 
and now storytelling is intrinsic to us. We are a species ofstorytellers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2012/may/23/storytelling-key-audience-consumer-engagement>
. 

Long copy has moved on with the industry, but the craft and skill involved 
remains the same. Now long copy is the bard that ensures the brand’s story is 
told across multiple communication channels, successfully binding together the 
different chapters of the brand’s story.

As an industry we must nurture and cherish this craft. This means working with 
clients, some of whom are guilty of critiquing every word of long copy, which 
make the process of getting approval unbelievably time consuming and 
frustrating. David Abbott famously switched to posters to advertise The 
Economist partly because of his frustration at the publication’s approval 
process. Investment also plays a key role in helping to encourage the use of 
long copy.  

Agencies need to invest to develop talent, especially as good copywriters are 
outnumbered by those who can’t write well. Or they can, but they find it hard 
work – which, to be fair, it is.  More importantly, we need to champion longer 
copy again. Despite the lack of recognition (long copy ads do not win awards – 
at least not international ones) we need long copy to be able to give meaning 
and context. To convey the messages we want to communicate. And tell the brand 
stories we want shared.

As guardians of this craft, we need to do more to promote it and make sure 
that it is not lost. Otherwise, as ad people, where would we be?

Jo Coombs is the managing director at OgilvyOne London <http://ogilvy.co.uk/>

More like this

• Content planning – mastering the basics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/09/content-planning-marketing-master-digital>
• Advice from Vice: six lessons from a publishing outsider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/08/vice-digital-media-publisher-investment>
• i100 and Quartz prove homepages are increasingly irrelevant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/02/i100-quartz-show-homepages-are-irrelevant>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/04/Liverpool_Everyman___the_theatre_was_as_rough_as_our_performances_.txt

Alison Steadman

When I had my audition at the Everyman with Alan Dosser, the artistic 
director, I went along with my prepared pieces – my classic and my modern. I 
did those and he said, "Great. Can you tell me a joke?" I said, "You what?" He 
just wanted me being me – to see if I was the kind of actor who would have a 
go. The plays the Everyman put on required personality.

I left drama school in July 1969 and went straight to Lincoln Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Royal and then Bolton Octagon. You 
learn a lot at drama school but really complete your training in theatres 
around the country. You used to do seasons everywhere but getting into the 
Everyman was exciting because I had a year's contract.

Then the wonderful John McGrath wrote a play for Liverpool, Soft or a Girl 
<http://www.everymantheatrearchive.ac.uk/soft_or_a_girl.html>, and the whole 
city was buzzing about it. There were huge queues outside the Everyman. There 
was a moment in the script with two guys looking over the city. At the time, so 
much of Liverpool was being rebuilt with modern housing. One character says, 
"What Hitler and the Luftwaffe didn't do in the 1940s, the Liverpool city 
council have just done now." That rang home for everyone.

I grew up in Liverpool so when I went to the Everyman I was staying with my 
parents. Jonathan Pryce and I were cast inThe Foursome 
<http://www.everymantheatrearchive.ac.uk/the_foursome.html>, which was also set 
in Liverpool. It was about two young couples who go off to Freshfield and spend 
a day on the sand dunes. The stage was covered in sand. The play had a lot of 
nudity and rude language – lots about shagging and so on. And then my parents 
came to see it. They were very modest, quiet people but they were determined to 
come along. I said, "Mum, you're going to see Jonathan Pryce walking around 
with no clothes on!" They were shocked by the play but thought it was great.
 My parents were shocked … Alison Steadman at the Everyman 
We were always coping with poky dressing rooms and bad conditions backstage, 
but we didn't care. The Everyman bistro, which was downstairs, did the best 
food at reasonable prices so we could all afford it. And then you'd have a 
drink with your friends after the show.

Alan had a vision of connecting with the people. Audiences felt it was for 
them and about them. We used to nickname him James Dean. He was very attractive 
but had a mean, determined look about him. He was inspirational, he didn't take 
any nonsense – he just went for it.

When I first started at the theatre, he put us all on a coach and sent us to 
the Ford factory in Speke. He sat us down and said, "I want you to meet the 
people ofLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> and to realise 
that this is their theatre. We are here for them." That was such a brilliant 
idea. As actors you can get very inward-looking but the Everyman was there to 
serve a community.

Roger McGough

When I first went to the Everyman it was known as the Hope Hall. It was an 
arts cinema and then it became a theatre and performance space with a bar 
downstairs. Before the Everyman opened up in the mid-60s there was the 
Playhouse, which had an older audience. It was regarded as elitist – the actors 
came up from London, did the shows and then went back on the next train. The 
Everyman was different. The actors came and stayed in Liverpool. They put on 
proletarian, socially conscious stuff.

I was living in the centre of town and we started going down there. Brian 
Patten, Adrian Henri and I had started doing poetry readings in various venues 
around the city. We'd take over folk clubs on a quiet Monday night. We started 
doing events – or "happenings" as they were known in America. This being 
Liverpool, there was always a lot of humour. In the bar downstairs there'd 
often be a band on – and a dance. We generally put on readings and sketches 
downstairs. Paul McCartney and George Harrison would come to the readings and 
hang around. That's where I met John Gorman and Mike McCartney; we formed the 
Scaffold and put on shows both downstairs and upstairs.
 Brian Patten and Roger McGough, sitting, in the Everyman bistro 
When we were doing sketches and poetic dialogues and bits of political satire 
in the bistro downstairs, we thought it was a bit naff to learn your lines – it 
was too much like showing off, too much like acting, so we'd always use our 
handwritten scripts. Then when we put on a show upstairs we'd think, "Ah, this 
is serious!" We'd learn our lines and we'd watch and learn from the actors.

My first play was put on at the Everyman, directed by Peter James. It was 
called The Commision. The Everyman asked me to write the play and then I wrote 
a play about someone who is commissioned to do a play but is unable to do it. 
And then the actors played out the attempts he'd made at it. In the end it 
turns out the actors commissioned the play and they kill him. You had to be 
there …

I was a teacher at the time and there were lots of lecturers and art students 
around the Everyman. It was OK to like sculpture because it involved manual 
labour, but things like ballet and opera and poetry were on the effete end of 
things. That was the time and the place and it was a class thing. but the 
Everyman was a melting pot. It wasn't every man for himself – it was every man 
and woman for each other.

Jonathan Pryce

I used to go to Hope Hall when it was a music venue. I'd hitchhike over from 
north Wales and do a double: go to the Cavern and then Hope Hall. I was a 
student at Edge Hill college in Ormskirk, doing art with drama as a subsidiary. 
My tutor was Gerry Dawson, who ran Unity theatre in Liverpool. They used to 
rent the Everyman for a week and put their plays on. Unity would sell out the 
theatre for a week while the Everyman company was struggling a bit. I started 
going to see the company when it was under Peter James and they had a style 
that was more rough and ready than the Playhouse down the road.

I trained at Rada and knew I wanted to return to the Everyman. I started there 
in 1972. You played as cast. I started off as Elbow in Measure for Measure and 
then was in The Foursome withAlison Steadman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alison-steadman>. The show's nudity was 
advertised and the expectation was that it would be the girls that took their 
clothes off – but it was the men. It broke a box-office record for selling the 
biggest number of single seats.

We did a mixture of classical theatre – because we needed to get the schools 
in – and plays often specifically written for the company by John McGrath, 
Chris Bond and Adrian Mitchell. I played Richard III and we did King Lear, 
which was a notable production because in the afternoon the same cast did 
Winnie-the-Pooh. My double was Edgar and Owl; Antony Sher was Christopher Robin 
and the Fool. It was a desperate production. The school kids had no awareness 
or interest in Winnie-the-Pooh at all. We didn't have much interest as actors. 
The kids would talk all the way through. Eeyore used to jump off the stage and 
say, "Eeyore, Eee-bloody-ore, who wants a ride on Eeyore's back?" And he'd take 
the kids for a ride around the auditorium. And then at night we'd do King Lear.

I left and spent a year at Nottingham with Richard Eyre and then Alan Dosser, 
the artistic director, announced he was taking a sabbatical from the Everyman 
and I brazenly asked if I could have the job. And they said yes. I'd directed 
one play at the end of my time at the Everyman – A Taste of Honey. When I went 
back, almost the entire company left to do Willy Russell's Beatles show in 
London – John, Paul, George, Ringo and … Bert. So it meant forming a company, 
choosing a short season of plays and getting on with it.

It was a great place to socialise as well as perform. We'd rehearse all day, 
perform at night and then be in the bistro til the early hours. Nearly all of 
us lived in Liverpool 8 so you'd be walking – or staggering – home.

The building was crumbling even then. The theatre was as rough as our 
performances.

You could never rely on the audience coming back play after play, which made 
for a very outfront performance style because you had to make an effort to grab 
their attention. So for a young actor starting out, it was the best experience 
I could have had. It made me fearless about being on stage.

Liverpool's Everyman theatre: earthy, not chi-chi and now back in business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/04/everyman-theatre-liverpool-rebuild-opens>
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/04/Roma_s_legion_have_the_power_to_topple_Juventus_from_the_throne_of_Italy.txt

In Italy the championship, like others in Europe, was suspended at the 
outbreak of the first world war. At the time William Garbutt's Genoa Cricket 
and Football Club led the Girone Nazionale, the precursor toSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>. The title for that year 
would be assigned to them after the conflict. Playing up front for theGrifone 
was a striker by the name of Percy Walsingham. By this writer's reckoning he is 
the last of 13 English footballers to be a champion of Italy.

Not since those trailblazers who spread the game across the globe has anyone 
matched Walsingham's achievement. Gerry Hitchens came close in the 60s but had 
the misfortune of leaving Internazionale and Cagliari in the years that they 
claimed the little tricolor shield known as theScudetto. In the modern era 
England has had no one to rival the success of Wales's John Charles or the 
Republic of Ireland's Liam Brady at Juventus.That might change with Ashley Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/07/roma-ashley-cole-proposed-move>
.

In Roma he has joined a club going places. Since the takeover by American 
investors three years ago they have been transformed into a global outfit. 
Partnerships with Nike, Disney and Volkswagen have been announced. Construction 
of a privately owned 52,500-seat stadium is expected to start soon. Under their 
president, James Pallotta, they are a modernising force seeking to effect 
change in a decadent environment. In that regard they are allies withJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> off the pitch.

On it, however, their rivalry and the likelihood of it being sustained over a 
prolonged period is at a height probably not seen since the 80s and the days of 
Paulo Roberto Falcão and Michel Platini. They are the elite. Right now, though,
Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> perhaps have more upward 
mobility. In part that is because Juventus are at the top and have been for 
three years, a dominance the Old Lady has not known since 1933. How can they do 
better in Serie A? Antonio Conte pondered this at the end of last season. It 
would be "impossible to improve" on what Juventus had achieved under his 
management.

They were unbeaten in the league in his first season. Statistically they were 
better in his second, picking up more points, more wins and more goals. Then in 
his third they made history by becoming the first team to break the 100-point 
barrier in Italy, with a 100% home record. Roma were the runners-up despite 
playing football evocative of Paolo Sorrentino's Oscar winner The Great Beauty, 
a film set in the Eternal City, and also etching their name into the record 
books.

They opened the campaign with 10 straight victories, a landmark in Serie A, 
and finished it with 85 points, the highest the club had ever achieved. That 
total would have been sufficient in five of the last six years to stitch the
Scudetto on their giallorosso shirts. "We're a little like Cristiano Ronaldo 
and theBallon d'Or in the Messi years," Roma's coach, Rudi García, told 
L'Équipe jokingly. "But Cristiano won it [again] in the end." Will Roma this 
season? Thecalcio cognoscenti think so. For them the tipping point came on 15 
July whenConte stunned Italian football by resigning from Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/15/antonio-conte-leaves-juventus-italy-manager>
.

As if losing "the emblem of their renaissance" was not traumatic enough, the 
timing, theidentity of his successor, Massimiliano Allegri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/16/massimiliano-allegri-juventus-coach-conte>
, plus Allegri's past with the playmaker Andrea Pirlo at Milan, and the 
continued anxiety over Arturo Vidal's future, left many anticipating a shift in 
the balance of power from Turin to the capital.

The swing of opinion would do well to bear the following in mind: Conte left 
behind the best squad in Italy and a fierce winning mentality. Allegri is also 
a better coach than many make out. Had he not decided to stay at Milan a year 
ago, he would have been in García's place at Roma. His name was top of the 
shortlist, as it supposedly was for the Italy post when it became available 
this summer. Still, his appointment has not reassured everyone. It has divided 
fans. Things are uncertain and that has led some to discern vulnerability in 
Juventus.

Roma keep going from strength to strength, adding to the impression that the 
gap has closed. Walter Sabatini, their transfer master, has been dubbed The 
Wolf of Trigoria (Roma's training ground). The man is some trader and this 
summer he has been buying more than he has been selling.

His deals have had a twofold impact. First they have added quality and 
quantity, equipping Roma for a title challenge and their return to the 
Champions League. They now have real depth at every position except perhaps at 
centre-forward. Secondly they have cocked a snook at their rivals.

In the hours that followed Conte's decision to step down, Sabatini appeared to 
take advantage and do the biggest deal of the transfer window in Italy, 
swooping for one of Juve's primary targets, the Verona winger Juan Iturbe. He 
also noticed Lazio's negotiations for the Cagliari centre-back Davide Astori 
had stalled and won the race to sign him, leaving fans of Roma's "cousins" 
infuriated. Moves like these have only enhanced the impression that an edge has 
been obtained.

Roma have kept their stars. The rock at the back, Mehdi Benatia, is not for 
sale while Miralem Pjanic signed a new contract before the World Cup. And so 
the mood is buoyant. Expectations are high and how Roma cope with that pressure 
will be a storyline to follow. But after coming so close to theScudetto in 2008 
under Luciano Spalletti, then in 2010 under Claudio Ranieri, and last year 
under García, this team feel due though not entitled to success. Then there is 
Francesco Totti. Imagine for a moment if Roma's captain, 38 next month, got to 
relive the emotions of 2001 when he won his one and only league title. And just 
imagine if, 100 years on from Percy Walsingham, an Englishman becamecampione 
d'Italia.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/04/Rosemary_Tonks__the_lost_poet.txt

The "disappearance" of the poet Rosemary Tonks in the 1970s was one of the 
literary world's most tantalising mysteries. Bizarre theories abounded as to 
her whereabouts – if she was still alive. As the poet Brian Patten put it in a 
BBC radio feature about her in 2009, she "evaporated into air like the Cheshire 
cat". One contributor imagined her living in Cuba, "smoking cigars 
in a doorway". Other commentators over the years have made her into a nun; 
consigned her to a sect; had her communing with the ghost ofCharles Baudelaire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/07/my-hero-charles-baudelaire-roberto-calasso>
; or put her in a shed at the bottom of someone's garden. For some reason, 
these mythmakers always required her to be living in poverty.

Having tried to visit her myself, 10 years ago, I knew all these theories to 
be far from the truth. But out of respect for her declared wish, maintained by 
her family, that she should be left in peace, I kept her address and situation 
secret. Tonks died last month at the age of 85 (all the existing records had 
her as four years younger). She had indeed been living as a near-recluse – but 
out of choice, quite comfortable in her circumstances. Even so, she remained 
restless in spirit, defiantly independent and quite alone in her continuing 
search for God, for she was ever alert to the "brainwashing", manipulative 
tendencies in the religious groups she encountered.

Known only as Mrs Lightband, the married name she had kept, she moved into Old 
Forest Lodge, an unremarkable three-storey house tucked away behind Bournemouth 
seafront, in 1981. There was no nameplate or number on the front door or garden 
gate; the curtains were kept closed, and neither knocks on the door nor letters 
were answered. Here she established her new identity, which meant turning her 
back on anyone connected with her old life, whether literary friends or family. 
I let her know about the radio programme – both the first broadcast and the 
repeat – by postcard, in case she threw letters away without opening them. I've 
since learned that she had two radios and two televisions, so she wasn't 
totally out of touch with the outside world; it was just that she chose only to 
engage with it on her own terms.

Rosemary Tonks was a writer from childhood. "Miss Bushman-Caldicott", a story 
she wrote while at school, was broadcast on BBC radio in 1946. Her first 
published book,On Wooden Wings: The Adventures of Webster, which she also 
illustrated, followed in 1948. In 1949, aged 20, she married Michael (Micky) 
Lightband, an engineer (later a financier) six years her senior. Her occupation 
on the marriage certificate is given as "writer".

Between 1963 and 1974, she published two epoch-defining poetry collections and 
six acerbic, satirical novels; wrote trenchant reviews for leading journals and 
newspapers; and collaborated with the BBC Radiophonic Workshop on an 
experimental sound-poem, "Sono-Montage".

Menard Press's Anthony Rudolf praised the "visionary quality" of the poems she 
published inNotes on Cafes and Bedrooms (1963) and Iliad of Broken Sentences 
(1967): "They seem to me to have bypassed the Movement poetry of the 1950s and 
to have emerged from the 1940s poetic matrix of Nicholas Moore, George Barker 
and JF Hendry, poets she would have read in her early 20s. It is a hyper-urban 
angst-ridden poetry, with ancestry stretching back to Baudelaire's Spleen de 
Paris and the Francophile English symbolists."

Interviewed by John Horder for the Times in 1967, she spoke of Baudelaire and 
Rimbaud as her direct literary forebears: "They were both poets of the modern 
metropolis as we know it and no one has bothered to learn what there is to be 
learned from them … The main duty of the poet is to excite – to send the senses 
reeling."

Among other admirers of her work were Cyril Connolly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/aug/31/featuresreviews.guardianreview2> 
("Miss Tonks's hard-faceted yet musical poems have unexpected power") and Al 
Alvarez ("real talent of an edgy, bristling kind"). Decades later, her mostly 
unavailable work is admired by poets includingAndrew Motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrewmotion>, Jo Shapcott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jo-shapcott>, Matthew Sweeney, Matthew 
Caley and John Stammers, who borrowed the title of his collection,Stolen Love 
Behaviour, from one of her poems.

Living in Hampstead and mixing with socialite writers such as Dame Edith 
Sitwell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/edith-sitwell>, a near-neighbour, 
Tonks became the toast of London's literary parties, one of very few published 
female poets of that time. She was not noted for supporting the sisterhood, 
however, and was taken to task byJane Gapen in the New York Review of Books 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1973/nov/29/women-and-poetry/> for 
an unsympathetic review of Adrienne Rich'sDiving into the Wreck, which "should 
be reviewed from a feminist outlook … It really hurts that a woman would say 
this about another poet".

Yet the literary world both attracted and repelled her, and she was to turn 
against its materialism, false values, betrayals and indulgence, as she was to 
follow Rimbaud in renouncing literature itself: "The mistakes, the wrong 
people, the half-baked ideas, / And their beastly comments on everything. Foul. 
/ But irresistibly amusing, that is the whole trouble" ("The Little Cardboard 
Suitcase").

Her mother's death in 1968 was the first in a series of misfortunes and crises 
that sent her life spinning out of control: a divorce she didn't want; a 
burglary in which she lost all her clothes; a lawsuit costing thousands of 
pounds; and ill-health, including incapacitating neuritis in her left arm and 
one good hand (her right was withered from polio). She turned her back on 
Christianity, believing the church had failed her mother, and instead looked 
for help from mediums, healers, spiritualists and Sufi "seekers". The inspiring 
presence in her house of a collection of ancient artefacts, including oriental 
god figures, led to her approaching a Chinese spiritual teacher and an American 
yoga guru. All these she repudiated in turn.

After her marriage collapsed, she found herself living alone, just a few doors 
away from her ex-husband (soon to be joined by a new wife), doing Taoist 
meditation, writing reviews and working on a new novel. She later attributed 
her next life disaster to difficult Taoist eye exercises, which involved 
staring for hours at a blank wall, turning the eyes in and looking intensely at 
bright objects. In 1977, on New Year's Eve, she was admitted to Middlesex 
hospital for emergency operations on detached retinas in both eyes. This was 
her reward for "10 long years searching for God". Returning home after a 
month's recuperation at a health hydro in Tring, she found herself totally 
helpless. Hardly able to see beyond a few feet, she rarely left the house, 
couldn't cook and became emaciated, all the time suffering from agonising pain 
in her eyes and permanent headaches.

An invitation to visit her aunt Dorothy in Bournemouth in 1979 gave her a way 
out. Resting in her flat for several months, her eyesight began to improve, 
until she could even read a page of a book. That book was the New Testament, 
which came to symbolise a new life in which she finally discovered spiritual 
truth in the Bible itself.

She decided to settle in Bournemouth, and in 1980 tried for several months to 
sell her London home. But each time a buyer turned up, the sky would darken and 
there would be a foul smell in the house, or so she told her cousins. This 
happened so often that she ruled out coincidence. She cleaned every room 
obsessively and threw out all her books on spiritualism and the occult, to no 
avail. Finally, believing that the religious artefacts that filled the house 
must be exerting some malign power, she packed them all into five suitcases and 
deposited them in the vault of Barclays Bank in Hampstead. The very next day a 
young couple came to see the house in bright sunshine, loved it and bought it.

Arriving back in Bournemouth, she resolved to free herself of all remaining 
kinds of "bondage". She had broken with her last healer, who had failed to cure 
her eyesight problems, having realised she had become psychologically dependent 
upon him. Next to go were sleeping tablets, which she had been on for most of 
her life; she shaved a little more off each tablet with a razor each day and 
managed to wean herself off them completely after a year.

Still aware of some supernatural occurrences, she embarked on an act that 
saddened her family when they learned of it after her death: she decided to 
destroy her priceless collection of oriental treasures. A bequest from an aunt 
by marriage, they were "graven images" that had to be burned by fire, according 
to the second commandment. Retrieving the five suitcases from London, she 
filled two garden incinerators with more than 40 artefacts, itemised in a 
handwritten list titled "The burning of some idols (11 August 1981)", and set 
fire to them. These included Chinese silk robes, carved Chinese letter seals 
and other artefacts of marble, terracotta, porcelain, plaster, mother of pearl, 
ivory, wood and stone, from China, Korea, Japan, Africa, Greece, Bali and 
Persia. She smashed and hammered at the Tang and Sung figures until she got the 
remnants down to "dog-biscuit size".

She still had the manuscript of an unpublished novel, about a man's search for 
God, written during the six years leading up to her eye operation; but a medium 
had recounted the entire plot to her, complete with detailed descriptions of 
all the characters, which meant the book must be dangerous and could lead 
others astray. Into the incinerator it went. Then she suppressed all her 
published work, made sure no one knew her new address, and obliterated the 
person she had been. That October, she travelled to Jerusalem and was baptised 
near the River Jordan, experiencing what she called her "second birth", the day 
before her 53rd birthday.

The treasures passed on to Tonks from her aunt are lost for ever. The one 
great gift she has left us – her poems – survive only in the libraries of 
collectors, and could be brought back to life for a new generation of writers 
and readers were her family to authorise their republication. As I understand 
it, there is no ban on republication in her will, which must have been written 
many years after she ceased to be Rosemary Tonks, so that her books didn't even 
exist for her by then. The woman who destroyed that priceless collection given 
to her on trust seems to me a very different person from the author of those 
marvellously edgy and timeless poems.

She mellowed in her more peaceful later years, and is said to have been much 
loved by staff at the Days hotel just around the corner from her house, where 
she went to have Christmas dinner every year on her own. She even made one 
friend there, who remembers her as kind, happy and always laughing. Finally, in 
November 2012, she wrote to a dearly loved cousin she had cut off years before 
to apologise: "I was boxed up, under the most frightful, frightful mental 
pressure. I was not myself. All my decisions were wrong, inhuman, appalling. 
Give me time, please, I long to explain it to you." But that was the last 
letter.

She continued to live in the Bournemouth house until last summer, when she 
downsized to a flat overlooking the sea after selling, giving away or 
destroying most of her possessions. A fortnight before her death on 15 April, 
she was taken to a local nursing home, suffering from the late stages 
of ovarian cancer. She was buried on Thursday 1 May, near her mother in the 
graveyard of the church of St Thomas a Becket, Warblington, Hampshire, without 
a funeral or any ceremony, in line with her wishes: the body was only a vessel 
for the spirit. If her instructions are followed, the name on her headstone 
will be "Rosemary Desmond Boswell Lightband".
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/04/Thompson_flies_the_FA_flag_in_Mali.txt

The flag of St George may not be flying in the central square here where those 
of the 16 African Nations Cup competitors are on display. But an English 
presence has been felt in Mali's capital as excitement mounts for a tournament 
which begins today.

As the locals went about their business yesterday, women selling anything from 
apples to sandals while a goat stood tethered to a telegraph pole beside a busy 
road, most were surely unaware of the Football Association's work here.

On Wednesday the FA's chairman Geoff Thompson addressed the congress of the 
Confederation of African Football (CAF) and announced plans to aid the 
development of the continent's game. Yesterday he visited an SOS children's 
village where the homes have been named after the Nations Cup qualifiers.

This poor but welcoming country is proud. Scooters, cars, shops and even the 
carts used for hauling oranges display Mali's red, green and yellow flag. When 
the hosts get things under way against Liberia this afternoon, the stadium in 
which seats have been selling for 500F (50p) will be buzzing. Those without 
tickets will gather around the televisions which sit outside roadside stalls.

This west African country, in which more than half the population live below 
the poverty line and teachers make £50 a month, has worked wonders to host the 
tournament given the economic climate. The jamboree promises to be colourful 
but Mali's football infrastructure - like many on this continent - lags behind 
Europe. And that is a problem the FA is taking on.

Thompson announced that this year and next the FA will host workshops on 
coaching, referee instruction, administration and marketing. All of the 
continent's national associations will be welcome and the appreciation was 
plain from one Cameroon delegate. "When I heard your words," he told Thompson, 
"I thought I was in heaven."

After the accusations levelled at the FA during its abortive bid for the 2006 
World Cup, the governing body is showing a more selfless side. Similar 
programmes will take place in the Caribbean and Asia. Ray Clemence, England's 
goalkeeping coach, has already run a course in Kuala Lumpur.

"We have a responsibility to the whole game," Thompson says. "We can't claim 
to be the mother of the game, the home of the game, if we don't develop it 
throughout the world, particularly in places like Africa, the Caribbean and 
Asia.

"We are rich and I think we need to share some of those riches and the 
experiences we have with developing nations. And we can learn. Our referees' 
officer said he gained a lot from a course he took in Botswana and that he 
would change his techniques."

The FA has a dedicated international relations section as well as special ties 
with Botswana, Lesotho and Malawi under the Uefa-Meridian project. The delivery 
of a computer as well as playing resources to Malawi and Lesotho has been 
invaluable. "A small amount of help makes a big difference," Thompson says. 
"They are things we take for granted."

He talks of helping to "unlock the vast potential of the game" in Africa, and 
there were skills to enjoy at the SOS village south-east of Bamako, where some 
of the 126 orphans and abandoned children ran about on a gravel pitch. The FA 
was greeted with broad smiles.

That so many of the children wore clothes with a Nations Cup logo further 
emphasised what hosting the competition means to the people. Others donned FA 
T-shirts as small footballs were handed out.

Thompson's route back to the capital took him past a 24-hour market which 
sells goats. From there it was straight to meetings with African football 
officials, building relationships.

Among those who heard and warmly greeted Thompson's speech to the CAF congress 
was Fifa's president Sepp Blatter. The FA alone was there without vested 
interest and knows its development work is helping to improve its profile and 
clout in the decision-making of world football. It has more people on the 
committees of Fifa and Uefa than ever before.

"It's important to have people on committees and panels who can give the 
English view to help to create the strategy for world and European football," 
Thompson says. "If you haven't got a voice like that you can do very little."

If Africa does not get outside help it will never realise its potential. As 
Thompson says: "The work will never finish." The FA, though, has made a start.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/04/Writers_pick_the_best_books_of_2014__part_one.txt

Margaret Atwood | This Changes Everything by Naomi Klein
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417131430740%2Fd3f66fce-1507-4552-837f-76dc032442d2-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417131430740%2Fd3f66fce-1507-4552-837f-76dc032442d2-1360x2040.jpeg>
This Changes Everything 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/this-changes-everything.html> by Naomi Klein 
(Allen Lane): whatever you may think of her solutions, the problems – climate 
change, plus everything that is changing as a result, plus the increasing 
toxicity of the planet – can no longer be denied. This is a conversation that 
needs to happen on a large scale, and on a local scale, and on a personal 
scale, very soon. If the oceans die, so do we. It’s that simple.

Julian Barnes | You’ll Enjoy It When You Get There by Elizabeth Taylor

Mariusz Szczygiel’s Gottland <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/gottland.html> 
(Melville House) is one of those delightfully unclassifiable books: a Polish 
journalist’s informal history of 20th-century Czechoslovakia. Like a 
non-fictionalBohumil Hrabal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/15/bohumil-hrabal>, Szczygiel is 
strange and funny, constantly off at jaunty tangents. He begins with 40 pages 
about the Bata shoe factory and ends with a brilliantly worked double narrative 
about a female burns doctor who translatesDick Francis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dick-francis> in her spare time. And it’s 
all true, too.

Margaret Drabble <https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaret-drabble>’s 
selection of Elizabeth Taylor’s short stories,You’ll Enjoy It When You Get There
 (NYRB), shows a novelist entirely at ease with the shorter form: seemingly 
quiet and suburban tales that enclose rage and despair; Taylor is also very 
good on pubs and drinking.

Bob Mankoff’s How About Never – Is Never Good for You? 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-about-never-is-never-good-for-you.html> 
(Henry Holt) is a charming autobiography that answers one of the minor yet 
gripping questions of magazine publishing: who gets to choose the cartoons in 
the New Yorker (he does), what’s it like to submit one (nerve-shredding), and 
what percentage gets chosen (infinitesimal). A cheering book, nonetheless.

Laura Bates | Probably Nothing by Matilda Tristram
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417131590632%2F9e7c202b-e6b7-444b-9d8c-3ba18b8bcfd1-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417131590632%2F9e7c202b-e6b7-444b-9d8c-3ba18b8bcfd1-1360x2040.jpeg>
The book that knocked me sideways this year was Matilda Tristram’s Probably 
Nothing <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/probably-nothing.html> (Viking) – an 
incredibly moving account of her experience of being diagnosed with bowel 
cancer while several months pregnant, told through the graphic memoir. It is at 
once heart-wrenching, hilarious and deliciously sardonic.

The other standout books of the year have been two wonderful but completely 
different poetry collections.Outside Looking On 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/outside-looking-on.html> (Influx) by Chimene 
Suleyman presents startlingly perceptive snapshots of human experience, delving 
powerfully into themes that range from big-city loneliness and longing, to 
prejudice and love.

And When I Grow Up I Want to Be Mary Beard 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/when-i-grow-up-i-want-to-be-mary-beard.html> 
(Burning Eye), by student slam-poet sensationMegan Beech 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53f1fb64e4b038fb92169cac/1138438>, 
is a vibrant and exciting exploration of gender inequality, modern feminism and 
what it means to be a young woman in the 21st century.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417173287247%2F6fd87480-bca7-4b76-bb94-7c1072f68b07-bestSizeAvailable.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417173287247%2F6fd87480-bca7-4b76-bb94-7c1072f68b07-bestSizeAvailable.png>
 Probably nothing by Matilda Tristram Illustration: Matilda Tristram 
Mary Beard | The Smile Revolution by Colin Jones
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417131219902%2F2e902fcb-9a13-466b-a27f-91ba658a868b-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417131219902%2F2e902fcb-9a13-466b-a27f-91ba658a868b-680x1020.jpeg>
I’ve just read Colin Jones’s The Smile Revolution 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/smile-revolution.html> (Oxford) – on the 
changing protocols of smiling in 18th-century France. It’s about as hard a 
subject for “history” as you can imagine, but Jones does brilliantly by 
approaching it partly through the history of dentistry, with some extraordinary 
stories about 18th‑century teeth (or the lack of them).

For the future, trips out in Cambridge will be enhanced by Simon Bradley’s 
revision of thePevsner (Buildings of England) Guide to Cambridgeshire 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/cambridgeshire.html> (Yale). It was much in 
need of updating and Bradley manages it expertly, without destroying the sparky 
style of the original.

William Boyd | Letter to Vera, edited and translated by Olga Voronina and 
Brian Boyd
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417132042398%2F4b1f1f34-dbd3-4b44-86ac-3cb110e8ee63-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417132042398%2F4b1f1f34-dbd3-4b44-86ac-3cb110e8ee63-680x1020.jpeg>
For Nabokovian completists (and I confess to being incurable) the great treat 
this year wasLetters to Véra 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/letters-to-vera.html> (Penguin Classics), 
edited and translated byOlga Voronina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/09/letters-to-vera-vladimir-nabokov-review-happy-marriage>
 andBrian Boyd <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/brian-boyd>. Here is Nabokov
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/vladimirnabokov> with his guard down, 
writing for only one reader, but the literary guile remains as shrewd and 
uniquely individual as ever. The book is also quietly revelatory, with a fresh 
light shone on the mysterious Mrs Nabokov.

Sailing the Forest <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/sailing-the-forest-2.html> 
(Picador) byRobin Robertson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/mar/29/featuresreviews.guardianreview16>
 is a wonderfully generous selected poems. Great precision of language, limpid 
observation and a rare ability to make the narrative of the poems resonate 
evocatively. A ripple-effect that is remarkably profound.

Craig Brown | The Interestings by Meg Wolitzer
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417132130601%2Fceb49640-3aab-477c-a543-527588b1ca14-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417132130601%2Fceb49640-3aab-477c-a543-527588b1ca14-680x1020.jpeg>
The Interestings by Meg Wolitzer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/10/meg-wolitzer-interview> 
(Vintage) is a pacy, conventional novel of American life, following six friends 
from their teens through to middle age, charting their interconnected hopes, 
triumphs and disappointments, but it’s all done with such an acute eye for 
detail, and such a rare combination of wit and wisdom that it becomes something 
new. I’m relieved to discover that, behind my back, Wolitzer has written nine 
more novels, so I can rest easy next year.

A fan once came up to Bob Dylan and said: “You don’t know who I am, but I know 
who you are.” To which Dylan replied: “Let’s keep it that way.”The Dylanologists
 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dylanologists.html> (Atria) by David Kinney 
is a razor-sharp study of the crackpot world of the obsessive fan, by turns 
very funny and slightly scary. Dylan’s extreme standoffishness has only served 
to fuel his fans’ need to get closer to him; the obscurity of his lyrics 
increases his fans’ need to interpret them. The great man seems to love and 
loathe it all, in roughly equal measures.

Shami Chakrabarti | Eleanor Marx: A Life by Rachel Holmes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417130822076%2Fcd07a90c-32f9-4dec-bf56-5719f042898f-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417130822076%2Fcd07a90c-32f9-4dec-bf56-5719f042898f-680x1020.jpeg>
Eleanor Marx: A Life <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/eleanor-marx.html> by 
Rachel Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/16/eleanor-marx-rachel-holmes-review>
 (Bloomsbury): this wonderful biography of the great feminist, internationalist 
and trade unionist (who was so much more than her father’s youngest daughter) 
is as much a gripping family drama and whodunnit as a serious work of 
19th-century history. And so relevant to many current challenges.

The Establishment (and How They Get Away with It) 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/establishment.html> by Owen Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/owen-jones> (Allen Lane): at a time when 
politicians aspire to be pop stars and vice versa, it is refreshing that a 
genuine political writer and thinker can achieve such popular appeal. Whether 
you agree or disagree with the Jones analysis, I challenge you not to be 
captivated by the authenticity of his voice.

Josh Cohen | The Iceberg by Marion Coutts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417132342069%2Ffa7ad098-7607-4ba5-b43c-3b9110900e2a-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417132342069%2Ffa7ad098-7607-4ba5-b43c-3b9110900e2a-1360x2040.jpeg>
The Iceberg <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/iceberg.html> (Atlantic), Marion 
Coutts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/15/marion-coutts-tom-lubbock-iceberg-extract>
’s memoir of her husbandTom Lubbock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jan/10/tom-lubbock-obituary>’s 
last days following the diagnosis of a brain tumour is as devastating as you 
might expect. Yet such is the intensity and passion of her writing, it’s also 
strangely exhilarating.

Leaving the Sea <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/leaving-the-sea.html> 
(Granta), Ben Marcus’s wonderfully various short-story collection, left me 
hungrily awaiting his next offering. AndThe Infatuations 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/infatuations-2.html> (Penguin) confirmed 
Javier Marías for me as among the best writers alive.
 Marion Coutts with her husband Tom Lubbock and their son Ev. Photograph: 
Marion Coutts 
Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett | Dept. of Speculation by Jenny Offill
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417130471539%2F2086c1db-3845-4f12-a072-7f998b6e12bb-1014x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417130471539%2F2086c1db-3845-4f12-a072-7f998b6e12bb-1014x1020.jpeg>
Dept. of Speculation <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dept-of-speculation.html>
 byJenny Offill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/14/dept-speculation-review-jenny-offill>
 (Granta) is an account of a marriage in crisis and the pressures of 
motherhood, and is written with such clarity and poetry that at times it is 
almost unbearably moving. And yet it has some intensely funny and witty 
moments, too.

Spoiled Brats <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/spoiled-brats.html> by Simon 
Rich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/20/spoiled-brats-simon-rich-review-funniest-book-year>
 (Serpent’s Tail) is a collection of offbeat, surreal short stories, some of 
which appeared in the New Yorker. “Sell Out”, the story of a simple man who 
falls into a vat of pickles and awakes in modern-day Brooklyn, is a very funny 
skewering of hipsterdom.

The Empathy Exams <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/empathy-exams.html> by 
Leslie Jamison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/05/leslie-jamison-empathy-exams-confessional-writing-not-self-indulgent>
 (Granta). To my mind, there aren’t enough British essayists, which is why, as 
a fan ofJoan Didion <https://www.theguardian.com/books/joan-didion> and Nora 
Ephron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nora-ephron>, I turn so often to 
American writers. As the title suggests, this collection examines empathy and 
what it means to feel pain, and covers topics ranging from Morgellons to 
Nicaragua to a job Jamison once had as a medical actor for trainee doctors, and 
each essay is illuminating, stylish and a pleasure to read.

Lena Dunham | Women by Chloe Caldwell
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417132469763%2Fa675f980-5863-47e3-9a90-a2a3b45ef135-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417132469763%2Fa675f980-5863-47e3-9a90-a2a3b45ef135-680x1020.jpeg>
I am currently obsessed with small-press books by women, most of which I 
bought at Powell’s bookstore in Portland, Oregon. Liz Scheid’sThe Shape of Blue 
<http://store.thelitpub.com/product/liz-scheid-s-the-shape-of-blue> (The Lit 
Pub) is a book far smaller in size than it is in spirit. This slim volume of 
experimental prose examines motherhood, grief and the complex ways that both 
these states of being tint even our most mundane experiences. I touched my 
face, so absorbed in the subtle story (rich with poetic and scientific detail) 
that I hadn’t registered my own tears.

Chloe Caldwell’s Women <http://www.hobartpulp.com/books/women> (Hobart) is 
another deceptively teensy book. This is the tragicomic tale of the author’s 
doomed relationship with an older woman and it perfectly captures the way good 
sex can make us throw anything under the bus – even our identities.

Mira Gonzalez’s I’ll Never Be Beautiful Enough to Make Us Beautiful Together 
<http://sorry.house/product/i-will-never-be-beautiful-enough-to-make-us-beautiful-together/>
 (Sorry House) brings experimental poetry into the internet age with dark, 
distinctly female riffs on ambition, depression and love.

John Gray | Mr Weston’s Good Wine by TF Powys

Now out in a new edition published by Vintage, Mr Weston’s Good Wine 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/mr-weston-s-good-wine.html> by TF Powys is one 
of the classics of English literature – and one of the strangest and most 
delightful books I’ve ever read. The story and the style are unfathomably 
simple. Accompanied by an assistant called Gabriel, a woolly-haired wine-seller 
drives into a small Dorset town called Folly Down. Time stops, and the sign on 
the battered van appears in the sky. Some in the town drink the light wine Mr 
Weston is selling, others the dark. Realising that the town is his own 
creation, the wine-seller longs to drink the dark wine himself. If you want to 
know how Mr Weston’s visit ends, you’ll have to read the book.

Translated into English for the first time by Siân Reynolds, The Mahe Circle 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/mahe-circle.html> (Penguin Classics) is one of 
Georges Simenon <https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgessimenon>’s most 
powerful roman durs – the non-Maigret novels in which ordinary lives are 
suddenly, and at times seemingly inexplicably, unsettled and irrevocably 
changed. Written in Simenon’s spare signature style, it’s unputdownably 
gripping.

Anthony Powell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/mar/30/news.obituaries>
’sWhat’s Become of Waring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/18/10-best-john-mullan> first 
appeared in 1939, and has been republished this year by the University of 
Chicago Press. Recognisably the work of the author ofA Dance to the Music of 
Time <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jan/26/fiction4>, it’s lighter and 
funnier than the later 12-volume cycle. But in some ways it’s also more cruel – 
a tale of literary charlatanry, set in the decayed world of interwar London 
publishing. I found it irresistible, and wish it had been twice as long.

Owen Jones | Austerity Bites by Mary O’Hara
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417172391247%2F86346a19-b059-41a6-b646-ccffb07d68da-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417172391247%2F86346a19-b059-41a6-b646-ccffb07d68da-1360x2040.jpeg>
In a determined effort to win public acquiescence, if not active support, for 
austerity, both the government and its media apologists have tried to hide the 
human impact of slash-and-burn economics.Mary O’Hara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/maryohara>’s superb Austerity Bites 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/austerity-bites.html> strips bare the reality 
of what Osbornomics means for human beings and, crucially, she gives a platform 
to voices that are otherwise unheard and deliberately ignored. Ever since the 
so-called “war on terror” was unleashed, Muslims have been widely demonised. 
All too often, they appear as terrorists, extremists and a threat to be 
contained.

Arun Kundnani <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/arun-kundnani>’s The 
Muslims Are Coming <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/muslims-are-coming.html> is 
a fantastic counterblast to the rise of Islamophobia.

Philip Hensher | We Are All Completely Beside Ourselves by Karen Joy Fowler
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417130978099%2F696e98eb-8f46-48f2-9e5b-fed84a5ddae7-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417130978099%2F696e98eb-8f46-48f2-9e5b-fed84a5ddae7-1360x2040.jpeg>
Michael H Kater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/aug/24/classicalmusicandopera.secondworldwar>
’s history of Weimar,Weimar: From Enlightenment to the Present 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/weimar.html> (Yale), is a rivetingly 
unpleasant story, solidly and even wryly done here.

James Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/james-hamilton>’s A 
Strange Business <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/strange-business.html> 
(Atlantic) is a brilliantly engaging account of the most interesting of all 
subjects: how artists make their money, in this case in 19th-century England. 
The book was published just in time to cast a curious light over the Tate’s 
splendid late-Turner show.

And the novel I liked best was Karen Joy Fowler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/03/karen-joy-fowler-pen-faulkner-award>
’sWe Are All Completely Beside Ourselves 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/we-are-all-completely-beside-ourselves-4.html> 
(Serpent’s Tail).

Naomi Klein | The Establishment by Owen Jones
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417177364094%2F65bcc172-0eb9-4e82-a447-20e4582f7116-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417177364094%2F65bcc172-0eb9-4e82-a447-20e4582f7116-1360x2040.jpeg>
All My Puny Sorrows <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/all-my-puny-sorrows.html> 
by Miriam Toews (Faber) is one of those rare novels destined to become a 
lifelong companion. This magnificently written story of two sisters, one of 
whom is determined to take her own life and asks the other for assistance, is 
shockingly funny, deeply wise and utterly heartbreaking.

In non-fiction, Glenn Greenwald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/glenn-greenwald>’s No Place to Hide 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/no-place-to-hide.html> (Hamish Hamilton) has 
far more staying power than the ripped-from-his-own-headlines topic might 
suggest, laying out a powerful and persuasive case for the duty to defend our 
fast-disappearing privacy.

I’ll never look at UK class politics in the same way after Owen Jones’s 
bracing and principledThe Establishment: How They Get Away With It 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/establishment.html>.

The best kids’ book I read to my two-year-old son is the beautiful and playful 
Julia, Child <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/julia-child.html> by Kyo Maclear 
(Tundra).

Mark Lawson | Amnesia by Peter Carey
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417132945295%2Fd86631e6-97e2-4326-8b2f-a6af98d27125-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417132945295%2Fd86631e6-97e2-4326-8b2f-a6af98d27125-680x1020.jpeg>
Simultaneously prompting sadness (because there will be no more work) and joy 
(the work is magnificent up to his final printed word “silently”),Seamus Heaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/seamusheaney>’s New Selected Poems: 1988-2013
 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/new-selected-poems-1988-2013.html> (Faber) is 
a glorious memorial to a rare example of a great writer who was also a good man.

It’s unusual on these occasions to recommend books that are often almost 
unreadably revolting; but, if we have to try to understand what Jimmy Savile 
and Cyril Smith did and why the British establishment let them, there are 
unlikely to be more thorough and troubling accounts thanIn Plain Sight: The 
Life and Lies of Jimmy Savile 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/in-plain-sight-6.html> by Dan Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/13/jimmy-savile-man-who-knew-him-best-dan-davies-in-plain-sight>
 (Quercus) andSmile for the Camera: The Double Life of Cyril Smith 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/smile-for-the-camera.html> by Simon Danczuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/simon-danczuk> and Matthew Baker 
(Biteback).

Linking the Assange <https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> and 
Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> affairs with the 
UK crown’s coup against the Australian government in 1975,Peter Carey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/petercarey>’s Amnesia 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/amnesia.html> (Faber) is a completely original 
political novel.

But the work to which I kept returning this year was KP: The Autobiography 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/autobiography-25.html> (Sphere), Kevin 
Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen>’s report from the 
England cricket changing room: an eye-popping account of malicious secret 
dossiers, snitching team-mates and the search for a scapegoat to protect 
mediocre managers – all happening within one of the flagship clients of the 
Department for Culture Media and Sport.

Penelope Lively | On Silbury Hill by Adam Thorpe

Adam Thorpe <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/adam-thorpe>’s On Silbury Hill
 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/on-silbury-hill.html> (Little Toller) is 
about that mysterious Wiltshire mound – archaeology, history, landscape – but 
with an undertow of memoir: brilliant.

Margaret Forster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/09/my-life-in-houses-margaret-forster-review-memoir-homes>
’sMy Life in Houses <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-life-in-houses.html> 
(Chatto & Windus) is such a clever idea. It’s a memoir sited in bricks and 
mortar, from childhood home to student lodging to marital home, to holiday 
cottage in Cumbria – social and personal history spliced together.

My roots are in West Somerset, so the new Somerset: South and West edition of 
Pevsner’s Buildings of England 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/somerset-south-and-west.html> (Yale) is warmly 
welcome. The old one, by Pevsner alone, was somewhat skimpy; Julian Orbach’s 
revisit is huge, reflecting the architectural riches of the area, and there is 
wealth within – informative and scholarly text, handsome photographs.

Robert Macfarlane | A Book of Death and Fish by Ian Stephen
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417133239553%2F9283b5f3-7cc5-4bfd-b2a8-3bc651cde828-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417133239553%2F9283b5f3-7cc5-4bfd-b2a8-3bc651cde828-1360x2040.jpeg>
Ian Stephen’s vast and intricate A Book of Death and Fish 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/book-of-death-and-fish.html> (Saraband) hooked 
me in from its first paragraph –it is aWaterland 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/waterland-4.html> for the Outer Hebrides, and 
seems to me a major moment in the modern literature of those islands.

The poems of Ancient Sunlight 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ancient-sunlight.html> (Enitharmon), by the 
poet, translator and editor Stephen Watts, moved and fascinated me, especially 
the long poem “The Birds of East London”, and Watts’s elegy for his friend and 
walking companion,WG Sebald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/wgsebald>.

Lastly, Philip Marsden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/12/rising-ground-review-philip-marsden-search-for-the-spirit-of-place>
’s superb “search for the spirit of place”,Rising Ground 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/rising-ground.html> (Granta), which takes 
Cornwall as its focal terrain, and the idea of sacred landscape as its subject.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417174793860%2Fd1b5d52c-bfd2-420b-820c-e5baed96a181-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417174793860%2Fd1b5d52c-bfd2-420b-820c-e5baed96a181-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fishing off the Scottish coast Photograph: Colin McPherson/Corbis 
Hilary Mantel | Outline by Rachel Cusk
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417133353347%2F56b0e4ec-36bc-4024-bcb1-d9073f22b93e-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417133353347%2F56b0e4ec-36bc-4024-bcb1-d9073f22b93e-1360x2040.jpeg>
My best historical novel is Winter Pilgrims 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/kingmaker-winter-pilgrims.html> (Century), 
Toby Clements’s blood-fuelled “I was there” rampage through the Wars of the 
Roses.

Winter bouquets should be offered to the clever and stylish Rachel Cusk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/rachel-cusk>: her novel Outline 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/outline.html> (Faber) is smoothly 
accomplished, and fascinating both on the surface and in its depths.

Eimear McBride | The Notebook by Ágota Kristóf
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417133494231%2Fd96da554-87f6-4d29-8620-d570782d3966-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417133494231%2Fd96da554-87f6-4d29-8620-d570782d3966-680x1020.jpeg>
Jenny Offill’s excellent Dept. of Speculation 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dept-of-speculation.html> is a fascinating 
examination of the complexity of the female writer’s post-childbirth experience 
of work as well as an astute, unsentimental portrayal of a foundering marriage.

Martin Dyar’s poetry collection Maiden Names (Arlen House) is both poignant 
and incisive, while Nigel McDowell’s children’s novelThe Black North 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/black-north.html> (Hot Key) is a great read 
and a cunning reworking of Irish history and lore into fantasy.

But the unstoppable CB Editions’ reissue of Ágota Kristóf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/12/agota-kristof-the-notebook-slavoj-zizek>
’sThe Notebook <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-notebook.html> is the book 
I have not been able to stop thinking about all year.

Pankaj Mishra | A Voice Still Heard: Selected Essays by Irving Howe

The Collected Poems (1969-2014) of Arvind Krishna Mehrotra 
<http://www.penguinbooksindia.com/en/content/collected-poems> (Penguin), 
superbly introduced byAmit Chaudhuri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/amit-chaudhuri>, represent an older kind 
of literary achievement: cumulative, unshowy and consistently brilliant.

Irving Howe’s A Voice Still Heard: Selected Essays 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/voice-still-heard.html> (Yale) reminds us of 
the void this great critic left in anglophone commentary – one that David 
Bromwich has been filling in the last decade with the searing pieces collected 
inMoral Imagination (Princeton).

As mendacious nationalisms pollute the air from Japan to Hungary, Ranjit 
Hoskote and Ilija Trojanow’sConfluences: Forgotten Histories from East and West 
<http://www.cambridgeindia.org/showbookdetails.asp?ISBN=9788190618670> (Yoda) 
points to an unimpeachable history of culture and society.

In his angrily subversive but always funny comic novel Bumf 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/bumf.html> (Jonathan Cape), the graphic writer 
Joe Sacco <https://www.theguardian.com/books/joe-sacco> has found a perfect 
target in the machinery of politics and mass manipulation.

Michael Morpurgo | Quentin Blake by Joanna Carey

Quentin Blake <http://shop.tate.org.uk/quentin-blake/quentin-blake/invt/16220> 
byJoanna Carey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/apr/19/featuresreviews.guardianreview26>
 (The House of Illustration): in a way, this beautiful book is a celebration of 
the opening of The House of Illustration, a project instigated by the great and 
beloved Quentin Blake. Carey has composed a fond appreciation of the artist and 
his work, which is, of course, wonderfully illustrated.

A Ted Hughes Bestiary 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ted-hughes-bestiary.html> selected by Alice 
Oswald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-oswald> (Faber): a collection 
of Hughes’s poetry of animals, wild and imagined, selected by Oswald is very 
much the inheritor of his mantle and understands Hughes and his world as well 
as anyone. Hughes’s poems are not all tooth and claw, as often imagined, but, 
rather, he opens our senses to the natural world as no one else can.

Blake Morrison | I Refuse by Per Petterson
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417133849561%2Fe7ba9fdc-1478-46e1-99f2-333abefb6cf9-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417133849561%2Fe7ba9fdc-1478-46e1-99f2-333abefb6cf9-1360x2040.jpeg>
You wait a century for a major Norwegian writer then two come along at once … 
InPer Petterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jan/03/per-petterson-interview>’s 
novelI Refuse <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-refuse.html> (Harvill Secker), 
childhood friends Jim and Tommy meet by chance, decades later, at a point of 
crisis for them both. The familiar Scandinavian tropes are present (snow, 
skating and depression) but the texture is moreIngmar Bergman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/jul/31/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
thanStieg Larsson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/stieg-larsson>: the 
suspense isn’t in the plot but the prose, with its extraordinary looping 
sentences. The translator is Don Bartlett, the man responsible for bringing us
Karl Ove Knausgaard <https://www.theguardian.com/books/karl-ove-knausgard>, the 
third part of whose life writing epic,Boyhood Island 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/boyhood-island.html> (Vintage), also weighed 
in here this year: why its seemingly banal episodes should be so compelling 
remains one of the great mysteries of our time.

The best biography I’ve read in 2014 is Adam Begley’s Updike 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/updike.html> (HarperCollins), an admiring but 
not uncritical portrait of a novelist who was merciless in drawing on his own 
experiences, sexual and otherwise.

And I’m enjoying A Modern Don Juan 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/modern-don-juan.html>, edited by Andy Croft 
and NS Thompson (Five Leaves), in which 15 contemporary poets lend fresh 
interest to Byron’s cantos, thanks to some ingenious modern rhymes (sequined 
cap / Gangsta rap, Che poster / pop-up toaster, Minerva’s Owl / Simon Cowell).

Andrew Motion | Paper Aeroplane by Simon Armitage

The poet Rosemary Tonks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/02/rosemary-tonks> made her name in 
the 60s and 70s, then withdrew from public sight and published nothing in the 
later part of her life. Following her recent death, Neil Astley has collected 
and introduced her work inBedouin of the London Evening 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/bedouin-of-the-london-evening.html> 
(Bloodaxe). It’s a highly original collection, mingling savage realism with a 
surreal fancy, and it restores an essential voice of late-20th-century British 
poetry to its rightful place.

And among our contemporaries: one mid-career gathering of great distinction – 
Simon Armitage’s new and selected poemsPaper Aeroplane 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/paper-aeroplane.html> (Faber), and two 
outstandingly good pamphlets from recent arrivals:Sam Riviere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/02/standard-twin-fantasy-sam-riviere-review-amuse-bouche>
’sStandard Twin Fantasy 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/standard-twin-fantasy.html> (Egg Box) and 
Declan Ryan’s selection forFaber New Poets 12 
<http://faberpoetry.co.uk/2014/09/26/declan-ryan-on-sabotage-reviews/> (Faber).

David Nicholls | Bark by Lorrie Moore
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417134064734%2F06b622fa-a999-4c48-af4b-4c02e265bb29-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417134064734%2F06b622fa-a999-4c48-af4b-4c02e265bb29-1360x2040.jpeg>
I rarely wish that books were longer, but Lorrie Moore’s latest collection, 
Bark (Faber), was over far too soon. Weightier but just as entertaining was 
Hermione Lee’s brilliant biography of Penelope Fitzgerald (Vintage). I enjoyed 
Viv Albertine’s frank and funnyClothes, Clothes, Clothes, Music, Music, Music, 
Boys, Boys, Boys 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/clothes-clothes-clothes-music-music-music-boys-boys.html>
(Faber); Jenny Offill’s dark and spiky story of marital breakdownDept. of 
Speculation <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dept-of-speculation.html> and, 
almost a companion piece, the one volume collection of Updike’s portrait of a 
marriage across the years,The Maples Stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/11/maples-stories-john-updike-review>
(Evergreen). Finally, the great Denis Johnson’s dark espionage novelThe 
Laughing Monsters <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/laughing-monsters.html> 
(Harvill Secker), out early next year.

Ian Rankin | The Zone of Interest by Martin Amis

I Can See in the Dark 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-can-see-in-the-dark.html> by Karin Fossum 
(Vintage) is an off-kilter crime story about a disturbed care worker and his 
murderous life. Unsettling and scarily well written.The Zone of Interest 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/zone-of-interest.html> (Jonathan Cape) is 
Martin Amis’s best novel in years, a grim yet satire-flecked investigation of 
the Nazi death camps. Van Morrison’s Lit Up Inside 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/lit-up-inside.html> (Faber) collects many of 
the great man’s favourite lyrics, and includes a foreword by a long-time fan.


Ruth Rendell | H Is for Hawk by Helen Macdonald
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417134194422%2Ffbd970fe-21c2-44a9-92a9-47293b0951bc-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417134194422%2Ffbd970fe-21c2-44a9-92a9-47293b0951bc-680x1020.jpeg>
The deservedly prize-winning H Is for Hawk 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/h-is-for-hawk.html> by Helen Macdonald 
(Jonathan Cape): I’ve never read anything like it before. The writing is 
beautiful and the emotion rich on every page; reading it you sink into love and 
the kind of feelings you rarely, if ever, experience in fiction today, still 
less in a work that has won a distinguished prize for non‑fiction. The last 
lines brought tears to my eyes.

Sarah Waters’ The Paying Guests 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/paying-guests-3.html> (Virago): the only fault 
I have to find with Waters is that she writes too seldom. I expected to take 
this novel, all 564 pages of it, at a leisurely pace. But I raced through it, 
breathing fast and when I had finished had to reread parts of the wonderful 
early chapters. I don’t like historical novels but this is the exception. I 
shall let a few months go by and then read it all over again with, I’m sure, 
undiminished pleasure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-23%23img-23&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417178259946%2Fb0f1d5e7-0e58-40b7-b286-60aa1a34628d-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-23%23img-23>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-23%23img-23&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417178259946%2Fb0f1d5e7-0e58-40b7-b286-60aa1a34628d-1020x612.jpeg>
 A goshawk in flight Photograph: Photofees/Getty Images/Flickr Open 
Kamila Shamsie | How to Be Both by Ali Smith
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-24%23img-24&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417134302902%2F05f67286-cf00-4ebd-a2ed-cc0f66a5a123-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-24%23img-24>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-24%23img-24&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417134302902%2F05f67286-cf00-4ebd-a2ed-cc0f66a5a123-1360x2040.jpeg>
From among newer writers: Mirza Waheed’s The Book of Gold Leaves 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/book-of-gold-leaves.html> (Penguin) is a 
beautifully told and finely choreographed story of love, art and conflict in 
Kashmir – and should certainly be bought in hardback for the amazing cover 
illustration based on a gold painting made by the author’s great-grandfather. 
From among those we’ve been lucky enough to have had around for a good few 
years now: there is no one like Ali Smith, andHow to Be Both 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-to-be-both.html> (Hamish Hamilton) is 
glorious proof that she keeps getting better.

Jeanette Winterson | Revolution by Russell Brand
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-25%23img-25&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417134415663%2Fb85a5b41-04c7-431a-9720-02d7f14bcc68-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-25%23img-25>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Writers%20pick%20the%20best%20books%20of%202014%3A%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2F-sp-writers-pick-best-books-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-25%23img-25&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417134415663%2Fb85a5b41-04c7-431a-9720-02d7f14bcc68-680x1020.jpeg>
It’s been a year of trying to understand why the global economy is run on 
behalf of the rich. Try these: James Meek’sPrivate Island 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/private-island-why-britain-now-belongs-to-someone-else.html>
. Forget immigration; it’s the foreign rich who own us.How to Speak Money 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-to-speak-money.html> by John Lanchester 
(Faber). Funny and frightening dic(k)tionary of what the banksters mean when 
they talk money and how to get the “con” out of economics. Thomas Piketty –
Capital in the 21st Century 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/capital-in-the-twenty-first-century.html>. 
(Harvard). Had to read twice – hard work but worth it. Russell Brand’sRevolution
 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/revolution-7.html> (Century). Facts, fun and 
a reminder that inequality is manmade and what we make we can unmake. As an 
unlikely ally,Mrs Moneypenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/nov/22/heather-mcgregor> says in her 
Financial Advice for Independent Women 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/mrs-moneypenny-s-financial-advice-for-independent-women.html>
 (Penguin): “You should aim to become more financially literate, with the aim 
of behaviour change.” Give it to George Osborne for Christmas.

And to stop myself going mad, add the sublime Don Paterson’s Smith 
<http://www.picador.com/books/smith-a-reader-s-guide-to-the-poetry-of-michael-do>
 (Picador), his eccentric, beautiful zen guide to the poetry of Michael Donaghy.

• Compiled by Laura Kemp. To order any of the books of the year, call Guardian 
book service on 0330 333 6846 or go toguardianbookshop.co.uk 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/>.

• This article was amended on 29 November 2014 to remove a statement that Lit 
Up includes a foreword by poet David Meltzer, which referred to the book’s US 
edition. The UK edition has a foreword byIan Rankin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ianrankin>.


Which book has topped your own list this year? Tell us in the form below, and 
we’ll round up your picks in a readers’ choice list.

To participate you will need to register or sign in by using the button below. 
Click here to open the form. 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/form/embed/1884471-sAs7xlnQJ7>  --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/04/_I_started_to_realise_what_fiction_could_be__And_I_thought__wow__You_can_take__on_the_world_.txt

When Small Island was published five years ago it started out faring much the 
same as Andrea Levy's first three books: well reviewed but not particularly 
widely read. "Give me a basket and I'll go door to door with it," she joked to 
the publishers. The book "wasn't really selling. It certainly wasn't doing 
anything fantastic."

It was a mark of the enduring quality of the first three – Every Light in the 
House Burnin', Never Far From Nowhere and Fruit of the Lemon – that none had 
gone out of print. It was perhaps a mark of their limitations that she had not 
managed to sell a single one abroad. "Middle aged and middle list," she points 
out. "It's bloody tough out there in that position. They were giving up."

But then came the prizes. First there was the Orange. Even then, she says, 
Small Island only got a halfway decent bump in Britain, and no one abroad was 
interested. Then, in fairly quick succession, came the Whitbread, the 
Commonwealth and the Orange Best of the Best, as well as being shortlisted for 
the National Book Critics Circle award in the United States, Romantic Novelist 
of the Year and two National Book awards in this country. The novel – about 
four Jamaicans who emigrate to Britain during the Second World War – broke 
through, in a very big way indeed. Translated into 22 languages, from 
Vietnamese to Macedonian, it became a bestseller both in the UK and Canada and 
was chosen as the Big Read in Hull, Liverpool, Bristol and Glasgow.

"I'm still reeling from the success of it," she says. "I'm still wondering 
what it was all about. It got sanctioned as part of the canon. Once I won the 
Whitbread I could see that it was going beyond what I ever thought was 
possible. Older white men interested in RAF gunners were buying it and reading 
it and enjoying it – the kind of people who'd never bought my books before. I 
wonder whether it was because we'd just gone through this massive period of 
immigration from eastern Europe and maybe there was safety in looking back at 
that part of our immigration history with some nostalgia."

Either way the success gave her the space, time and resources to pursue her 
literary interests more freely. A couple of years ago she joked that she was 
retiring: she settled into a rhythm of doing the household chores – paying 
bills, shopping, etc – in the morning and then writing in the afternoon.

"Well, my retirement is from striving," she explains. "Thanks to Small Island, 
I don't have to pay the mortgage anymore. There's not a day goes by that I'm 
not grateful I'm in that position. This girl who had 'shop girl' written right 
the way through her. 'Shop girl,'" she repeats, and acts out writing the words 
on her forehead. "Now I can explore what I'm passionate about."

Small Island signalled a significant shift in scale and scope from her three 
earlier works, which were strong, engaging novels drawn from her immediate life 
experience and with a familiar cast of characters. Each was set, for the most 
part, in north London, with a working-class, black family whose parents had 
emigrated from Jamaica. Each family had at least one daughter who aspired to 
higher education and at least one sibling who did not. The parents, meanwhile, 
were more interested in keeping their heads above water than in issues of race, 
racism and class inequality.

Levy calls these books her "baton race". "I'm a writer learning my craft and 
gaining in confidence or not," she explains. "So that was the person who I was. 
Then you write the next one. Anyone reading my books could say, 'Well, she got 
a dictionary there,' and 'She got a thesaurus at this point.'"

She can tell you, almost to the day, when she was injected with the creative 
adrenaline that producedSmall ­Island – it was 1997, and she was judging the 
Orange prize.

"I suddenly understood what fiction was for," she says. "I had to read books 
that I wouldn't have necessarily read. I had to read them well and I had to 
read them in a short space of time. Back to back. Annie Proulx and ­Margaret 
­Atwood and Beryl Bainbridge and Anne Michaels – boom, boom, boom. And I 
started to realise what fiction could be. And I thought, wow! You can be 
ambitious, you can take on the world – you really can."

Her ambitions took her further and further away in time and place from her own 
beginnings.Small Island roamed from London to the Midlands to Jamaica and was 
set during the ­wartime years. Her latest book,The Long Song, is set on a 
Jamaican slave plantation, Amity, in the early 19th century in a period up to 
emancipation. It tells the story of a slave girl, July, and the love, envy, 
intrigue and spirit of playful insubordination, as well as the political 
resistance and personal rivalries that surround and consume her – an everyday 
tale of ­ordinary plantation folk a continent and several generations away from 
where she started out.

While invitations to parties and literary events have been more plentiful in 
recent years, she has been less likely to accept them. "Something got put to 
bed withSmall Island," she says. "Running to stand still, wanting to be part of 
that literary thing – all that has left me. I could quite happily not have 
anything to do with that world now."

Descriptions of her as "angry" (she once said "fuckers" in an interview) or 
"worthy" are ham-fisted attempts to force racial stereotypes on her that simply 
do not fit. In person she is both irreverent and somewhat shy. There's an 
endearing anxiety about her and, because success came fairly late in her career 
– she was 48 whenSmall Island appeared – she has remained largely unaffected by 
her recent renown. When she was close to finishing the novel she woke up one 
night in a sweat fearing she might lose it. She already kept three copies in 
her handbag, as well as the one on her computer and the one hidden in her car 
in case the house burned down. But what, she fretted, if the house caught fire 
and a spark took the car with it? The next morning she made another copy and 
sent it to a friend.

"If I go away I send a copy of my work to my agent asking him not to look at 
it but, should I not return, please to publish it posthumously," she says. "I 
am forever convinced that I am never going to get to the end of a book, or that 
I'm going to lose it. I am an extremely cautious person."

When Levy's mother, Amy, was going to marry her father, Winston, in Jamaica, 
her father's family hired a detective to make sure there was nothing untoward 
in her family history. Middle-class, light-skinned Jamaicans – Amy was a 
trained teacher, Winston a book-keeper with Tate & Lyle – they arrived in 
Britain in the late 40s to discover that none of the privileges they had 
inherited counted for much in Britain. Her mother's teaching qualifications 
were not accepted here, so she took in sewing while she retrained. Her father 
worked for the post office.

Raised on a predominantly white council estate in Highbury, north London, Levy 
was inculcated with a sense of class rooted more in cultural behaviour than in 
resources. "I thought we were middle class because we had three meals a day," 
she says.

Whatever conscious racial identity she had while growing up seems to have been 
remarkable more in terms of what was to be avoided than what was to be 
embraced. "I was not at all curious about Jamaica as a child," she says. "We 
were told, not in so many words, to be ashamed of it." She only discovered that 
her father came over on theEmpire Windrush, when it was shown on television and 
her dad casually mentioned it while he was ironing.

The London she was raised in was not the multicultural city it is now. "We 
didn't know that many black people," she says. "There was another black family 
at my church. But I just used to feel terribly sorry for them because I knew 
how difficult it was, and we would never have spoken. I'm not proud of who I 
was then. But I was just dealing with things as they came."

It was only when she went to art college that she encountered the social 
confidence and material resources of Britain's middle classes. It would be some 
time before she started to locate herself within the country's racial 
hierarchies – during the 80s, when London prided itself on equal opportunities, 
and she was working in the voluntary sector. During a racial awareness workshop 
her office was asked to divide into black and white, so she went with the 
whites.

"And everybody said, 'No, no, you should be on the other side,' and it was a 
bloody shock. I thought black people were doing something somewhere else that I 
wasn't a part of. I felt embarrassed to go to their side. Not ashamed. I just 
thought, 'I don't know anything about being black' – I was inauthentic. I was a 
political person – a left-leaning person; I thought I'd got my politics sussed. 
And suddenly this thing came along, and I had to learn about it."

When did she work it out? "Any day now," she says, laughing. "I'm still 
learning."

She points to a boxed set of Who Do You Think You Are?, the BBC TV series in 
which well-known Britons trace their ancestry, and says, "They'd never have me 
on because I'm not a big enough celebrity, but I love it. People can go back 
generations, but they've only done about three black people and they can only 
take them back so far and then the door shuts, because all that's there are 
ledgers. Nothing else – just a big mass of nothing. I know my ancestors were 
slaves, but what did they do? How did they live? How did they manage to survive 
it? We know so little and very little of what we do know comes from them. The 
only way you can go any further is through fiction."

This was the curiosity that produced The Long Song, in which July tells her 
story, urged on by her son. Levy says she was inspired to write the book after 
a young black woman at a conference on the legacy of slavery rose to ask how 
she could have pride in her ancestry when all her ancestors had been slaves. "I 
thought, 'Wow, how could anyone have any shame or ambivalence at having slave 
ancestry?" She wanted to see if she could change this woman's mind and make her 
proud of her ancestry.

"When you try to imagine slavery in terms of what happened it's almost 
unthinkable," she says. "But people got through it. Not every day was: 'Got up, 
got whipped thoroughly, saw someone hung from a tree'. So I try to give a sense 
of the daily life – the drinking milk and eating yam of it – as well as the 
lives of the planter class. I try to give people their humanity."

But she is acutely aware of how the subject matter itself could overpower her 
literary efforts. WhenSmall Island failed to make the Booker longlist, one of 
the judges explained that the book was "worthy", but that the acclaim "comes 
from the topic rather than the treatment . . . People feel guilty about not 
thinking about our colonial past."

This is not the world that Levy wants to take on The Long Song, and she did 
not begin with the intention of writing a book set during the time of slavery. 
She wants her books to be read, she explains, but many people, for different 
reasons, prefer not to engage with that aspect of their past.

She talks about slavery as though it is a live wire in the public imagination. 
When people touch it there is a short-circuit; either they think they know all 
about it, they don't want to know about it or they think that it's not a topic 
worth knowing about.

"There are a lot of people who are open to talking about it," she says. "But 
there are many who will say that it was a very long time ago, and a lot who 
just don't want you to mention it because it will make them feel bad. It's 
painful, both for black and white people. But it's 300 years. You can't just 
ignore it. I don't want people to feel guilty. I don't want them to pick it up 
and feel like they're taking vitamins."

The novel was intended to cover a much longer period of time, she says. "I was 
intending to get out of there very quick. But you can't avoid slavery. You 
can't. You have to go to that place. You keep banging into it. I'm not 
proselytising. It's the book I had to write because of who I am."
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/05/Apple_is__arrogant__and_encryption_is__oversold___ex_NSA_lawyer_tells_SXSW.txt

In one of the more unusual analyses of the Apple v FBI debate, former NSA 
general counsel Stewart Baker has comparedTim Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tim-cook> to 1940s Hollywood star Doris 
Day.

Addressing an audience at SXSW young enough to have no idea who Doris Day was, 
Baker quoted Hollywood musician and actorOscar Levant 
<https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Oscar_Levant>, who said: “I remember her before 
she was a virgin.”

He then said Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> had only 
recently changed its strategy in handling law enforcement requests for access.

“Who remembers Tim Cook before he was a virgin? Look at his record in China,” 
Baker said. “WhenChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> asked, [Apple] 
didn’t even tell us they were doing it. Other countries are going to request 
access, and companies are going to give it to them once they demonstrate that 
they really need it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fapple-fbi-debate-sxsw-former-nsa-lawyer-tim-cook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd65eb5fef9fb8df3b4a8e5dc63f14d1e1ddddf7b%2F0_0_2105_1264%2F2105.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20is%20'arrogant'%20and%20encryption%20is%20'oversold'%2C%20ex-NSA%20lawyer%20tells%20SXSW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fapple-fbi-debate-sxsw-former-nsa-lawyer-tim-cook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20is%20%27arrogant%27%20and%20encryption%20is%20%27oversold%27%2C%20ex-NSA%20lawyer%20tells%20SXSW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fapple-fbi-debate-sxsw-former-nsa-lawyer-tim-cook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd65eb5fef9fb8df3b4a8e5dc63f14d1e1ddddf7b%2F0_0_2105_1264%2F2105.jpg>
 Doris Day (she’s a film star). Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
“Europe and the rest of the world hates Silicon Valley,” he said, giving the 
example of the recent vote by theFrench assembly on an anti-terrorism bill 
<http://en.europeonline-magazine.eu/frances-lower-house-votes-in-favour-of-anti-terrorism-bill_442938.html>
 that expanded powers to search and detain.

Baker, now a private lawyer and a regular on the conference circuit, was 
speaking on a SXSW panel about the attempt by the FBI to order Apple to help 
access data on a phone used by one of the San Bernardino shooters. The issue 
has reignited discussion about whether the government should have access to 
backdoors in encryption software, following a similar situation in the 1990s – 
thedamaging effects of which are still being felt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/02/secure-https-connections-data-passwords-drown-attack>
. Baker was general counsel at the NSA from 1992 to 1994.

Baker repeatedly laid into Apple, claiming encryption was “the single most 
oversold technology in the public sphere” and that Apple would accommodate 
requests by the Chinese government becauseChina is now its biggest market 
<http://www.cnet.com/news/china-passes-us-to-become-apples-biggest-iphone-market/>
. He said that Apple had previously cooperated with intelligence requests from 
the Chinese government and called the tech industry “arrogant”.

“How about this: if you refuse to provide access to the government, the 
government is entitled to get every disclosure you have ever made for every 
other country. Because Apple is not telling us about China,” he said. “And if 
Apple is assuming the benefits of the privacy it is selling, how about it takes 
on some of the costs of crime? How about letting victims of crimes that have 
not been solved because of encryption sue Apple for damages?”

He said that Apple had spent money proving its social responsibility by making 
sure minors were no longer employed on its third-party production lines. “So 
for them to turn around and say that if you take pictures of kids while you are 
molesting them, we are going to protect you as well? That’s not socially 
responsible. They need to take into account the misuse of their technology and 
ask how to fix it.”

Slightly bemused fellow panelist Matt Blaze, associate professor of computer 
and information science at the University of Pennsylvania, said that it was 
irrelevant to focus on Apple’s reputation or corporate responsibility. “That’s 
like asking if Al Gore is a nice guy relevant to climate change,” he said. 
“It’s a sideshow.

“This could charitably be described as a crisis.”

Three days earlier, Barack Obama spoke at SXSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/barack-obama-sxsw-south-by-southwest-austin--apple-fbi>
, urging both sides of the debate not to be absolutist and to work for a 
constructive solution. Baker suggested that the president had taken a more 
moderate line than others in the White House.

“It was a surprise, because many people around him would come out 
differently,” he said. “TheFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> had 
enormous trouble pushing its agenda through the White House … so for him to 
come out in this direction means he clearly believes it, because plenty of 
people told him not to come out and say that.”

Obama attempts to heal rift between tech world and government at SXSW
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/barack-obama-sxsw-south-by-southwest-austin--apple-fbi>
Amit Yoran, president of the computer security company RSA, cautioned against 
oversimplifying the debate as security v privacy, or Washington v Silicon 
Valley. “We have heard resoundingly from the [intelligence community] that it 
does not favour weakening security or encryption, so this is not really a 
national security issue,” he said. “This is a law enforcement issue.


“From a business and internet perspective, we’re on a shaky world stage post-
Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/06/edward-snowden-democratic-debate>
. The corporate world doesn’t have lots of trust in the US government and our 
own citizens have all-time low trust … [the FBI order] would be a dangerous 
move against US economic interests.”

Blaze said the technology industry relies on consumers updating hardware 
regularly so that security fixes can be rolled out, and that trust in those 
updates could be jeopardized.

“So far the choice has been law enforcement shutting down v weakening 
encryption – I don’t think anybody wants either of those things,” he said. 
“What alternatives are there? They could explore hacking techniques of their 
own, or existing weaknesses in the product, or use hardware reverse engineering 
… law enforcement has been largely reactive on a case-by-case basis.

“These things require a healthy debate that we just haven’t had, and over the 
course of two crypto-wars, we’ve made remarkably little progress.”

Last week, Apple’s general counsel, Bruce Sewell, defended the company’s 
business in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/10/apple-v-fbi-encryption-case-digital-privacy-san-bernardino>
 against claims made in the FBI’s legal case, including that the company had 
provided data in response to 74% of 4,000 state requests.

“The ridiculous section on China where an AUSA, an officer of the court, uses 
unidentified internet sources to raise the spectre that Apple has a different 
and sinister relationship with China. Of course that is not true, and the 
speculation is based on no substance at all. To do this in a brief before a 
magistrate judge just shows the desperation that the Department of Justice now 
feels.”
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/05/Apple_v_FBI_congressional_hearing___as_it_happened.txt

11.17pm GMT 23:17  <> 

The end of a five-hour hearing

That’s the end of this liveblog. To recap: A grueling five-hour hearing 
revealed an unusual antipathy toward the Department of Justice in the usually 
FBI-friendly house of representatives judiciary committee.

Lawmakers didn’t merely accuse the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> of undermining cybersecurity. Ranking 
committee member John Conyers attacked bureau director James Comey, saying that 
using the case of the iPhone belonging to the San Bernardino killer Syed Farook 
had undermined the remit of the legislature itself.

“Can you appreciate my frustration with what appears to be little more than an 
end-run around this committee?” asked Congressman Conyers. California 
representative Zoe Lofgren, whose district includes part of Silicon Valley, 
called the quest to provide entry into encryption exclusively for law 
enforcement “a fool’s errand”.

 Photograph: Justin Lane/EPA 
Farook, with his wife Tashfeen Mailk, killed 14 people and wounded 22 in a 
shooting spree on 2 December, after which agents retrieved two destroyed cell 
phones, one useless laptop and Farook’s locked iPhone.Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has said it will not open the 
phone despite the government’s acquisition of a court order under the 
227-year-old All Writs Act by the Department of Justice attempting to compel 
the company to write a tool that will break its password security measures.

Law-and-order conservatives including committee chairman Jim Sensenbrenner 
told Comey they supported his efforts, some invoking arguments ranging from 
Isis to the nuclear holocaust.

Trey Gowdy told Apple general counsel Bruce Sewell he was unimpressed with the 
company’s contributions to lawmaking and demanded the company draft a bill to 
address what he characterized as a technology problem. “We draft it and then 
your army of government relations folks opposes it, so I’m just trying to save 
us time,” he said. “Why don’t you propose it? Tell us what you could agree to.”

For perhaps the first time, Comey summarized the Department of Justice’s 
argument without the disingenuous claim that the San Bernardino case was 
limited in scope: “It’s not [Apple’s] job to watch out for public safety,” he 
said. “That’s our job.”

Sewell said that the company did want to help with public safety and said the 
company held the rights as a private citizen, among them its first amendment 
right to free speech and thirteenth amendment right to deny forced labor.

The government’s argument in the San Bernardino case “makes my blood boil,” he 
told the committee. “To say that it’s a marketing ploy, to say that it’s about 
PR really diminishes a very serious conversation that should be about security 
of the American people.””

Susan Landau, a security expert who has worked with Google and the National 
Security Agency, offered perhaps the most daring take of the lengthy hearing: 
the FBI needs to get real about technology and start trying harder to break 
encryption. “While the NSA has the right to break into a system, nobody ever 
guaranteed that it would be easy to do so,” she says. “TheFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> needs to take a page from the NSA.”

We’ve written a summary of the full hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/01/apple-fbi-congress-hearing-iphone-encryption-san-bernardino>
; follow the Guardiantechnology <https://www.theguardian.com/us/technology> 
section and national security editorSpencer Ackerman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/spencerackerman> for more on the 
developing story.

Updated at 11.28pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d621a1e4b054e3a47b4e34%23block-56d621a1e4b054e3a47b4e34>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d621a1e4b054e3a47b4e34%23block-56d621a1e4b054e3a47b4e34>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d621a1e4b054e3a47b4e34%23block-56d621a1e4b054e3a47b4e34&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d621a1e4b054e3a47b4e34%23block-56d621a1e4b054e3a47b4e34>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d621a1e4b054e3a47b4e34%23block-56d621a1e4b054e3a47b4e34>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d621a1e4b054e3a47b4e34%23block-56d621a1e4b054e3a47b4e34&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.30pm GMT 22:30  <> 

Landau, answering a question from Congresswoman Lofgren, says that everything 
is connected to the internet and treating it like it isn’t will lead to 
trouble. TheFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> is asking for login 
credentials, she says, which would set an especially dangerous precedent.
 Professor Susan Landau of Worcester Polytechnic Institute Photograph: 
Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images 
“Whether you’re talking about the power grid, the water supply, whatever, 
we’re connected in disastrously insecure ways and the best way to get in is 
login credentials,” says Landau.Encryption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/encryption>, she said, was a serious 
problem. “What law enforcement is asking for is going to preclude those strong 
solutions.”

“Director Comey said we’ve talked to everyone who’ll talk to us, but I was at 
an event held by the FCC, and some senior people from DOJ were there and I said 
‘Well NSA has skill X and skill Y’ and they said ‘They don’t share them with us 
except in extraordinary circumstances.’”

“Law enforcement don’t have the skills and they need to develop them,” she 
says.

Updated at 10.38pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d6163de4b0d0eebca0592f%23block-56d6163de4b0d0eebca0592f>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d6163de4b0d0eebca0592f%23block-56d6163de4b0d0eebca0592f>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d6163de4b0d0eebca0592f%23block-56d6163de4b0d0eebca0592f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d6163de4b0d0eebca0592f%23block-56d6163de4b0d0eebca0592f>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d6163de4b0d0eebca0592f%23block-56d6163de4b0d0eebca0592f>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d6163de4b0d0eebca0592f%23block-56d6163de4b0d0eebca0592f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.13pm GMT 22:13  <> 

Gowdy on encryption legislation: 'We draft it - and then your army of 
government relations folks opposes it'

One of Sewell’s better rhetorical flourishes is immediately undercut by Gowdy, 
who out-yells committee chairman Sensenbrenner.

“Is it right to make our society overall less safe in order to solve crime?” 
Sewell asks softly; Gowdy immediately leaps in to demand “a fact-pattern” in 
which Gowdy would comply with the order.

Sewell: “Congressman, we will follow the law.”

Gowdy: “I’m asking you for a fact-pattern.”

Sewell: “I don’t, uh –”

Gowdy: “Can you give me a fact pattern where you would agree with what the 
bureau is asking you to do in California, whether it be nuclear weapons or a 
terrorist plot?”


Sewell: “I can’t imagine such a fact pattern.”

Gowdy: “Can you submit legislation, to Chairman Sensenbrenner’s question, that 
you would wholeheartedly support?”

Gowdy goes on to make one of the better points against Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>, which is that they already have 
quite a bit of influence congressionally and the legislature’s inaction on 
encryption doesn’t exactly have nothing to do with Apple’s interests. “We draft 
it and then your army of government relations folks opposes it, so I’m just 
trying to save us time. Why don’t you propose it? Tell us what you could agree 
to.”

“We’re willing to and we’ve offered to engage in this process,” Sewell says.

Updated at 10.45pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d611d2e4b054e3a47b4e14%23block-56d611d2e4b054e3a47b4e14>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d611d2e4b054e3a47b4e14%23block-56d611d2e4b054e3a47b4e14>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d611d2e4b054e3a47b4e14%23block-56d611d2e4b054e3a47b4e14&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d611d2e4b054e3a47b4e14%23block-56d611d2e4b054e3a47b4e14>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d611d2e4b054e3a47b4e14%23block-56d611d2e4b054e3a47b4e14>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d611d2e4b054e3a47b4e14%23block-56d611d2e4b054e3a47b4e14&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.59pm GMT 21:59  <> 

Congressman Lofgren, who represents Silicon Valley, is pretty contemptuous of 
Comey. “It’s a fool’s errand,” she says. “We’ll never be able to do what’s 
being asked of us by theFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi>.”

Again, strange bedfellows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/29/apple-fbi-encryption-battle-supporters-technology-politics>
 here: Ted Poe (again, a Texan Republican, and also a former judge) reiterates 
New York Democrat Jerrod Nadler’s point earlier that there’s a distinct 
possibility that Congress might simply tell Apple it can’t have encryption of 
the type it wants. “I actually agree with Mr Nadler; I know that’s going to 
bother him a little bit.”

Updated at 10.32pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60e92e4b054e3a47b4e0f%23block-56d60e92e4b054e3a47b4e0f>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60e92e4b054e3a47b4e0f%23block-56d60e92e4b054e3a47b4e0f>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60e92e4b054e3a47b4e0f%23block-56d60e92e4b054e3a47b4e0f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60e92e4b054e3a47b4e0f%23block-56d60e92e4b054e3a47b4e0f>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60e92e4b054e3a47b4e0f%23block-56d60e92e4b054e3a47b4e0f>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60e92e4b054e3a47b4e0f%23block-56d60e92e4b054e3a47b4e0f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.46pm GMT 21:46  <> 

Apple: code is protected under first amendment

Sewell tells Nadler he believes ordering Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> to unlock the iPhone both 
violates both the first amendment to the US constitution and the thirteenth 
(which abolished slavery in 1865).

“This is a compelled speech by the government for the purposes of the 
government which is absolutely a first amendment problem, and it is speech that 
Apple does not want to make,” he says. “And it is conscription; forced labor.”
 New York district attorney Cyrus Vance testifying before the House Judiciary 
Committee, seated next to encryption expert professor Susan Landau Photograph: 
Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images 
Darrell Issa makes a more utilitarian argument, echoing the point former FBI 
counterterrorism agent Mike German madeearlier in this blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/live/2016/mar/01/apple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live?page=with:block-56d5e2d8e4b0d0eebca058af#block-56d5e2d8e4b0d0eebca058af>
. “Have you ever ordered a shredding company to put paper back together?” he 
asks Vance.

Vance has to concede. “Of course I haven’t.”

Updated at 10.06pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60c5ee4b023cfa49eba50%23block-56d60c5ee4b023cfa49eba50>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60c5ee4b023cfa49eba50%23block-56d60c5ee4b023cfa49eba50>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60c5ee4b023cfa49eba50%23block-56d60c5ee4b023cfa49eba50&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60c5ee4b023cfa49eba50%23block-56d60c5ee4b023cfa49eba50>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60c5ee4b023cfa49eba50%23block-56d60c5ee4b023cfa49eba50>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60c5ee4b023cfa49eba50%23block-56d60c5ee4b023cfa49eba50&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.38pm GMT 21:38  <> 

Republican Jim Sensenbrenner, chairman of the judiciary committee, yells at 
Sewell for not bringing a bill with him to Congress.

“We have the iPhone of a dead terrorist!” he says. “You’ve come to us to ask 
us to do something, but you don’t know what you want us to do.” He theatrically 
yields his time in disgust, then Sewell tries to answer, then Sensenbrenner 
yells at him and yields his time again. It’s less impressive the second time.
 Congressman James Sensenbrenner Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images 
“I assume Apple will have legislative suggestions for us after the court makes 
its decision and Apple likes orApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> doesn’t like it,” Jerrold 
Nadler, a Democrat from New York, says after Sensenbrenner yields for real. He, 
too, isn’t happy with the one-device argument, and lights into Manhattan 
district attorney Cyrus Vance over it.

Vance has said he has 175 iPhones waiting to be unlocked, but the number has 
now risen to 205.

 * Thanks to reader Kevin Lee, who points out that Jerrold Nadler is from New 
York, not California, as previously stated

Updated at 10.21pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60af7e4b054e3a47b4e06%23block-56d60af7e4b054e3a47b4e06>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60af7e4b054e3a47b4e06%23block-56d60af7e4b054e3a47b4e06>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60af7e4b054e3a47b4e06%23block-56d60af7e4b054e3a47b4e06&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60af7e4b054e3a47b4e06%23block-56d60af7e4b054e3a47b4e06>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60af7e4b054e3a47b4e06%23block-56d60af7e4b054e3a47b4e06>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60af7e4b054e3a47b4e06%23block-56d60af7e4b054e3a47b4e06&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.34pm GMT 21:34  <> 

Here’s an interesting exchange highlighting one of the odd contours of the 
debate:there’s been a lot of discussion about cryptography that seems to 
suggest that there’s a difference between “breaking encryption,” whatever that 
means (sharing super-secret prime numbers? Unclear.) and weakening the passcode 
so that it can be brute forced, as Comey describes below, inless than half an 
hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/live/2016/mar/01/apple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live?page=with:block-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea#block-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea>
.

Conyers gets at this asks by asking Sewell what the functional difference is 
between asking Apple to break its own encryption, and askingApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> to weaken the passcode 
protections.

“Functionally there is no difference,” Sewell says. “What we’re talking about 
is an operating system in which the passcode is an inherent and integrated part 
of the decryption system. That passcode is a cryptographic key.” So that’s your 
cryptography 101 lesson: you participate in encryption on an incredibly 
sophisticated level every time you punch in your passcode.

Back to the hearing: “I was hoping you’d go in that direction,” Conyers 
replies.

Sewell says that it is “absolutely false” that Apple no longer works with law 
enforcement. “The relationship with law enforcement falls within my shop at 
Apple and I’m incredibly proud of the work we do. We have dedicated individuals 
available around the clock.”

“This is not about the San Bernardino case,” Sewell tells Conyers. “This is 
about the safety and security of every iPhone.”


It’s probably safe to stop talking about the “one device” argument, made by 
Josh Earnest, among others, but Sewell kicks it one more time to make sure it’s 
stopped moving permanently: “There’s no distinction between a 5C and a 6 in 
this case. It is extensible, it is common, it is effectively the same.”

Updated at 10.19pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d608f1e4b054e3a47b4dfa%23block-56d608f1e4b054e3a47b4dfa>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d608f1e4b054e3a47b4dfa%23block-56d608f1e4b054e3a47b4dfa>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d608f1e4b054e3a47b4dfa%23block-56d608f1e4b054e3a47b4dfa&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d608f1e4b054e3a47b4dfa%23block-56d608f1e4b054e3a47b4dfa>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d608f1e4b054e3a47b4dfa%23block-56d608f1e4b054e3a47b4dfa>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d608f1e4b054e3a47b4dfa%23block-56d608f1e4b054e3a47b4dfa&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.24pm GMT 21:24  <> 

Apple's general counsel: ' Hearing that this is a marketing issue makes my 
blood boil'

Goodlatte asks Sewell whether Comey’s assertion that Apple’s position is 
informed by its business model is “a fair contrast”.

“It’s by no means a fair contrast, Mr Chairman,” Sewell tells Goodlatte. He 
says he does not, in fact, agree with the characterization and says that 
hearing this described as a marketing issue “makes my blood boil”.

“I’ve heard this raised before. It was raised in New York, it was raised in 
San Bernardino. This is not a marketing issue, that’s a way of demeaning our 
argument. We don’t take out billboards for our security. We don’t take out ads 
for our encryption. We’re doing this because we think it’s the right thing to 
do. To say that it’s a marketing ploy to to say that it’s about PR really 
diminishes a very serious conversation that should be about security of the 
American people.”

It’s not quite true that Apple doesn’t advertise based on its security, but it 
is true thatApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> advertises its 
security as being non-annoying, rather than, say, so hard to break that you can 
sell drugs with impunity.

Sewell goes on to cites Orenstein’s decision from yesterday finding Apple 
“conscientious,” and says that in fact Apple is at war toimprove public safety. 
“We see ourselves as being in an arms race with crminals, cyberterrorists and 
hackers,” Sewell said.

Updated at 9.39pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60711e4b0d0eebca0590d%23block-56d60711e4b0d0eebca0590d>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60711e4b0d0eebca0590d%23block-56d60711e4b0d0eebca0590d>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60711e4b0d0eebca0590d%23block-56d60711e4b0d0eebca0590d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60711e4b0d0eebca0590d%23block-56d60711e4b0d0eebca0590d>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60711e4b0d0eebca0590d%23block-56d60711e4b0d0eebca0590d>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d60711e4b0d0eebca0590d%23block-56d60711e4b0d0eebca0590d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.14pm GMT 21:14  <> 

Apple's testimony begins

The second panel is finally up. 

Bruce Sewell, general counsel for Apple, reads the statement released yesterday
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/29/apple-lawyer-fbi-bruce-sewell-more-crime>
, telling the committee that he “appreciate[s] your invitation and the 
opportunity to a part of the conversation on this issue.”

Sewell doesn’t say much to put Comey’s mind at ease, given his earlier remarks 
on what Comey sees as Apple’s attempt to usurp the FBI’s remit. “We share their 
goal of creating a safer world,” Sewell says, adding that the company 
cooperates often with law enforcement.
 Bruce Sewell, Apple general counsel, at the hearing Photograph: Joshua 
Roberts/Reuters 
Susan Landau, a former privacy analyst for Google, gives a very interesting 
testimony. Among other observations, she says that “smartphones are 
increasingly wallets” and points out that “NSA will tell you that stealing 
login credentials is the easiest way into a system,” a direct contradiction to 
the FBI’s assertion that what it’s asking is less harmful than to break 
encryption.

Landau also quotes words of wisdom she attributes to a former NSA colleague: 
“While the NSA has the right to break into a system, nobody ever guaranteed 
that it would be easy to do so,” she says. “TheFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> needs to take a page from the NSA.”

Updated at 9.40pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d602fde4b0d0eebca058ff%23block-56d602fde4b0d0eebca058ff>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d602fde4b0d0eebca058ff%23block-56d602fde4b0d0eebca058ff>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d602fde4b0d0eebca058ff%23block-56d602fde4b0d0eebca058ff&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d602fde4b0d0eebca058ff%23block-56d602fde4b0d0eebca058ff>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d602fde4b0d0eebca058ff%23block-56d602fde4b0d0eebca058ff>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d602fde4b0d0eebca058ff%23block-56d602fde4b0d0eebca058ff&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.00pm GMT 21:00  <> 

FBI concludes argument: 'Public safety is not Apple's job'

Finally, after three hours of condescending to the House of Representatives 
and being sniped at in return,FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> 
director James Comey is getting around to saying what he actually thinks about 
five minutes before he leaves the panel.

Hakeem Jeffries from Queens presses Comey on whether the Department of 
Justice’s characterization of Apple’s position as driven entirely by marketing 
and PR was as contemptuous as it sounded to Jeffries.

Comey responds that he thinks Apple’s market power “is not an illegitimate 
motive,” but he doesn’t like what they’re selling, because it essentially 
privatizes law enforcement. “It’s not their job to watch out for public 
safety,” he says shortly. “That’s our job.”

Comey also manages to state the opposition’s case very succintly in pushing 
back on a question from Jeffries about breaking into the phone; he also 
identifies where he takes issue with it: “I don’t agree with your framing,” he 
tells Jeffries. “It sounds like you’re saying you either have privacy or you 
have unfettered access and I don’t agree with that.”
 Congressman David Cicilline, speaking at a news conference on the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership in October 2015 Photograph: J. Scott Applewhite/AP 
Rhode Island democrat David Cicilline asks Comey if encryption law ought to 
come from the legislative branch rather than case law. “Do you agree that the 
authority has to come from Congress?” he asks.

Comey, for perhaps the first time, gives a flat negative. “No, I don’t agree 
with that.”

Updated at 9.11pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ff32e4b0d0eebca058f8%23block-56d5ff32e4b0d0eebca058f8>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ff32e4b0d0eebca058f8%23block-56d5ff32e4b0d0eebca058f8>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ff32e4b0d0eebca058f8%23block-56d5ff32e4b0d0eebca058f8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ff32e4b0d0eebca058f8%23block-56d5ff32e4b0d0eebca058f8>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ff32e4b0d0eebca058f8%23block-56d5ff32e4b0d0eebca058f8>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ff32e4b0d0eebca058f8%23block-56d5ff32e4b0d0eebca058f8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.43pm GMT 20:43  <> 

Comey’s case in a nutshell is that he does not want Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> to destroy its security and that 
the distinction is not a hairsplitting one.

We’re asking Apple to take the vicious guard dog away and let us pick the lock.

Suzan DeIbene tells Comey that the tension is not between privacy and security 
but between security and security, Comey replies, “You’ve said that very well, 
between privacy and security.”


“It’s not a technological problem - it’s a business model problem,” he said.

Updated at 8.50pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fe4ee4b023cfa49eba18%23block-56d5fe4ee4b023cfa49eba18>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fe4ee4b023cfa49eba18%23block-56d5fe4ee4b023cfa49eba18>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fe4ee4b023cfa49eba18%23block-56d5fe4ee4b023cfa49eba18&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fe4ee4b023cfa49eba18%23block-56d5fe4ee4b023cfa49eba18>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fe4ee4b023cfa49eba18%23block-56d5fe4ee4b023cfa49eba18>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fe4ee4b023cfa49eba18%23block-56d5fe4ee4b023cfa49eba18&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.40pm GMT 20:40  <> 

Cedric Richmond, Democrat from Louisiana’s second district, representing New 
Orleans, is present to discuss the case of a pregnant woman murdered by an 
unknown assailant; investigators have asked for access to her phone but have 
run up against encryption – she is believed to have kept a detailed diary on 
it. Comey has mentioned the case several times.

“We balance public safety and criminal justice; are we in danger of creating 
an underground criminal sanctuary for some very disturbed people?” Richmond 
asks Comey.


“Until this, there was no closet in America, no safe in America, no bank in 
America that could not be entered with a judge’s order. Until we drift to that 
place, we gotta talk about it.”

The case is not one that has been regularly mentioned up to this point; there 
is a case similar to the one described that was reported on in Louisiana last 
year.

Updated at 8.51pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fccbe4b054e3a47b4dd2%23block-56d5fccbe4b054e3a47b4dd2>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fccbe4b054e3a47b4dd2%23block-56d5fccbe4b054e3a47b4dd2>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fccbe4b054e3a47b4dd2%23block-56d5fccbe4b054e3a47b4dd2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fccbe4b054e3a47b4dd2%23block-56d5fccbe4b054e3a47b4dd2>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fccbe4b054e3a47b4dd2%23block-56d5fccbe4b054e3a47b4dd2>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fccbe4b054e3a47b4dd2%23block-56d5fccbe4b054e3a47b4dd2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.32pm GMT 20:32  <> 

FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> director James Comey:

“They’ve set out to make a phone that they can’t get into and they’re darn 
near succeeding. I think with the 6 and beyond, they would have succeeded. That 
doesn’t make them bad people.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fc23e4b054e3a47b4dce%23block-56d5fc23e4b054e3a47b4dce>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fc23e4b054e3a47b4dce%23block-56d5fc23e4b054e3a47b4dce>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fc23e4b054e3a47b4dce%23block-56d5fc23e4b054e3a47b4dce&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fc23e4b054e3a47b4dce%23block-56d5fc23e4b054e3a47b4dce>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fc23e4b054e3a47b4dce%23block-56d5fc23e4b054e3a47b4dce>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5fc23e4b054e3a47b4dce%23block-56d5fc23e4b054e3a47b4dce&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.30pm GMT 20:30  <> 

FBI could access the San Bernardino phone in 26 minutes - if Apple helped with 
the password

An interesting note from Comey: a brute force attack on the phone would take 
26 minutes, were Apple’s password-entry security measures defeated (again, see
our explainer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/20/apple-fbi-iphone-explainer-san-bernardino>
 for a little more detail on how this works).

And then Comey tells the committee he blames one man for his current 
predicament: Edward Snowden.

“Since Mr. Snowden’s revelations, terrorist tradecraft changed.” Terrorists 
tried to “wrap their lives in encryption,” he says, and as a result, “we’re 
looking for needles in a haystack, and the most important needles turn 
invisible.”


Steve King of Iowa brings up the Isis activity on Twitter, possibly, though 
his syntax is a little hard to decipher. “I’m interested in how the parameters 
that have been examined thoroughly by all the lawyers on this panel might apply 
to Isis, or any of their affiliates or subordinates that might be necessary if 
we’re going to defeat that ideology.”
 Congressman Steve King, seen with Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz 
Photograph: Mark Kauzlarich/Reuters 
King’s opinion appears to be that San Bernardino is small potatoes and that 
the American public ought to be more worried about “radical Islam” than even 
the constant discussion of Isis around Farook/Malik murders has made them.

“I think it’s known that Isis or Isil are seeking a nuclear device,” King 
tells Comey. “If that became part of the American consciousness, do you think 
that would change this debate?”

Comey does the thing he’s done so beautifully during the FBI’s messaging to 
the public, which is to plead for reasoned debate while reminding everybody 
that theFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> stands between them and 
anarchy. “I do worry that it’s hard to have nuanced complicated conversations 
like this in the wake of a disaster, which is why I think it’s so important 
that we have this conversation now.”

The director also rejects the contention that the FBI already has the 
technology and just wants precedent. “If we could have done this quietly and 
privately, we would have done it.”

Updated at 9.01pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea%23block-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea%23block-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea%23block-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea%23block-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea%23block-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea%23block-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.14pm GMT 20:14  <> 

Congressman Gowdy backs the FBI

James Comey has a friend! Trey Gowdy, the mind behind the Benghazi hearings, 
says that “I confess up front that my bias is toward public safety” when it 
comes to the need to balance the various rights conferred by the US 
constitution.

“You just can’t go in these categories [of device] unless somebody consents, 
really?” Gowdy asks, appalled. Comey agrees wholeheartedly with Gowdy’s outrage.

“I love privacy too but I want my fellow citizens to understand that we also 
love our bodies,” Gowdy says.
 Congressman Trey Gowdy Photograph: Corbis & Getty Images 
“If you have a bullet from an officer who was shot in a defendant, you can go 
to a judge and ask the defendant to anesthetize a patient and remove a that 
bullet from the body.” If that’s not unreasonable search and seizure, the South 
Carolina Republican asks, what is?

Gowdy is 100% wrong on this. 

The incident to which he appears to refer is a well-known Supreme Court case 
called Winston v Lee in which it was decided that the use of a previous high 
court decision, Schmerber v California, to mandate surgery to recover bullets 
against the will of a defendantwas unreasonable search and seizure.

“The proposed surgery would violate respondent’s right to be secure in his 
person and the search would be ‘unreasonable’ under the Fourth Amendment,”said 
the court <https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/470/753/case.html>.

Updated at 8.59pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f4c8e4b0d0eebca058dc%23block-56d5f4c8e4b0d0eebca058dc>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f4c8e4b0d0eebca058dc%23block-56d5f4c8e4b0d0eebca058dc>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f4c8e4b0d0eebca058dc%23block-56d5f4c8e4b0d0eebca058dc&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f4c8e4b0d0eebca058dc%23block-56d5f4c8e4b0d0eebca058dc>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f4c8e4b0d0eebca058dc%23block-56d5f4c8e4b0d0eebca058dc>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f4c8e4b0d0eebca058dc%23block-56d5f4c8e4b0d0eebca058dc&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.58pm GMT 19:58  <> 

Comey no longer seems at ease; when quizzed on the nature of the Fourth 
Amendment (which secures Americans against unreasonable search and seizure) he 
continually says he’s not a constitutional scholar, though he was district 
attorney for the southern district of New York. He then says that he thinks the 
framers of the constitution “wouldn’t have imaginedany box or storage area or 
device that couldn’t be entered <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TUVScBf8Znw>.”

He’s also clearly getting annoyed with the line of questioning. “People keep 
asking ‘Why didn’t you come to Congress?’” he says. “Well, because we’re in the 
middle of a terrorism investigation. I think the courts will resolve this 
faster than any legislative body could.”


He further takes the opportunity of being criticized for seeking judicial 
redress when he ought to have come to Congress in the opinion of the committee 
to praise the judiciary. “I have a number of friends who are magistrate judges, 
and they’re awesome and they think well and they rule well.”

“The world I imagine is a world in which people comply with warrants,” Comey 
says. “How they do it is up to them.”

Updated at 9.11pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f279e4b054e3a47b4da4%23block-56d5f279e4b054e3a47b4da4>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f279e4b054e3a47b4da4%23block-56d5f279e4b054e3a47b4da4>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f279e4b054e3a47b4da4%23block-56d5f279e4b054e3a47b4da4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f279e4b054e3a47b4da4%23block-56d5f279e4b054e3a47b4da4>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f279e4b054e3a47b4da4%23block-56d5f279e4b054e3a47b4da4>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5f279e4b054e3a47b4da4%23block-56d5f279e4b054e3a47b4da4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.48pm GMT 19:48  <> 

Congressman Chaffetz: the FBI already seriously overreaches

We’re back, and the committee has resumed queuing up around Room 2141 of the 
Rayburn House Office Building to spank the director of theFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi>.

Jason Chaffetz of Utah asks Comey when historically the government has been 
able to compel a company to create a product to help it. Comey says he doesn’t 
know but cites one of the cases in the DoJ’s brief, New York Telephone. Comey 
is fairly short with him.
 Congressman Jason Chaffetz Photograph: Cliff Owen/AP 
Chaffetz then tells Comey he thinks the FBI already overreaches to a serious 
extent. “We can’t even see the degree to which you’re using Stingrays, or the 
requirements [to use them].” Chaffetz points out that the devices areapparently 
being supplied to the IRS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/26/stingray-surveillance-technology-irs-cellphone-tower>
 without any congressional oversight. What is the occasion of their use, he 
asks. “Is it articulable suspicion? Is it probable cause?”

“I don’t have a great answer,” Comey responds. “I like the idea of giving as 
much transparency as possible.”

The Guardian has repeatedly attempted to use the Freedom of Information Act to 
acquire records on the use of Stingrays from law enforcement and the documents 
received have without exception been redacted to remove all mention of the 
device.

Updated at 8.56pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5efd9e4b0d0eebca058c9%23block-56d5efd9e4b0d0eebca058c9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5efd9e4b0d0eebca058c9%23block-56d5efd9e4b0d0eebca058c9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5efd9e4b0d0eebca058c9%23block-56d5efd9e4b0d0eebca058c9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5efd9e4b0d0eebca058c9%23block-56d5efd9e4b0d0eebca058c9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20v%20FBI%20congressional%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5efd9e4b0d0eebca058c9%23block-56d5efd9e4b0d0eebca058c9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fapple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5efd9e4b0d0eebca058c9%23block-56d5efd9e4b0d0eebca058c9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
That’s the end of this liveblog. To recap: A grueling five-hour hearing 
revealed an unusual antipathy toward the Department of Justice in the usually 
FBI-friendly house of representatives judiciary committee.

Lawmakers didn’t merely accuse the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> of undermining cybersecurity. Ranking 
committee member John Conyers attacked bureau director James Comey, saying that 
using the case of the iPhone belonging to the San Bernardino killer Syed Farook 
had undermined the remit of the legislature itself.

“Can you appreciate my frustration with what appears to be little more than an 
end-run around this committee?” asked Congressman Conyers. California 
representative Zoe Lofgren, whose district includes part of Silicon Valley, 
called the quest to provide entry into encryption exclusively for law 
enforcement “a fool’s errand”.

 Photograph: Justin Lane/EPA 
Farook, with his wife Tashfeen Mailk, killed 14 people and wounded 22 in a 
shooting spree on 2 December, after which agents retrieved two destroyed cell 
phones, one useless laptop and Farook’s locked iPhone.Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has said it will not open the 
phone despite the government’s acquisition of a court order under the 
227-year-old All Writs Act by the Department of Justice attempting to compel 
the company to write a tool that will break its password security measures.

Law-and-order conservatives including committee chairman Jim Sensenbrenner 
told Comey they supported his efforts, some invoking arguments ranging from 
Isis to the nuclear holocaust.

Trey Gowdy told Apple general counsel Bruce Sewell he was unimpressed with the 
company’s contributions to lawmaking and demanded the company draft a bill to 
address what he characterized as a technology problem. “We draft it and then 
your army of government relations folks opposes it, so I’m just trying to save 
us time,” he said. “Why don’t you propose it? Tell us what you could agree to.”

For perhaps the first time, Comey summarized the Department of Justice’s 
argument without the disingenuous claim that the San Bernardino case was 
limited in scope: “It’s not [Apple’s] job to watch out for public safety,” he 
said. “That’s our job.”

Sewell said that the company did want to help with public safety and said the 
company held the rights as a private citizen, among them its first amendment 
right to free speech and thirteenth amendment right to deny forced labor.

The government’s argument in the San Bernardino case “makes my blood boil,” he 
told the committee. “To say that it’s a marketing ploy, to say that it’s about 
PR really diminishes a very serious conversation that should be about security 
of the American people.””

Susan Landau, a security expert who has worked with Google and the National 
Security Agency, offered perhaps the most daring take of the lengthy hearing: 
the FBI needs to get real about technology and start trying harder to break 
encryption. “While the NSA has the right to break into a system, nobody ever 
guaranteed that it would be easy to do so,” she says. “TheFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> needs to take a page from the NSA.”

We’ve written a summary of the full hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/01/apple-fbi-congress-hearing-iphone-encryption-san-bernardino>
; follow the Guardiantechnology <https://www.theguardian.com/us/technology> 
section and national security editorSpencer Ackerman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/spencerackerman> for more on the 
developing story.
 
Landau, answering a question from Congresswoman Lofgren, says that everything 
is connected to the internet and treating it like it isn’t will lead to 
trouble. TheFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> is asking for login 
credentials, she says, which would set an especially dangerous precedent.
 Professor Susan Landau of Worcester Polytechnic Institute Photograph: 
Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images 
“Whether you’re talking about the power grid, the water supply, whatever, 
we’re connected in disastrously insecure ways and the best way to get in is 
login credentials,” says Landau.Encryption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/encryption>, she said, was a serious 
problem. “What law enforcement is asking for is going to preclude those strong 
solutions.”

“Director Comey said we’ve talked to everyone who’ll talk to us, but I was at 
an event held by the FCC, and some senior people from DOJ were there and I said 
‘Well NSA has skill X and skill Y’ and they said ‘They don’t share them with us 
except in extraordinary circumstances.’”

“Law enforcement don’t have the skills and they need to develop them,” she 
says.
 
One of Sewell’s better rhetorical flourishes is immediately undercut by Gowdy, 
who out-yells committee chairman Sensenbrenner.

“Is it right to make our society overall less safe in order to solve crime?” 
Sewell asks softly; Gowdy immediately leaps in to demand “a fact-pattern” in 
which Gowdy would comply with the order.

Sewell: “Congressman, we will follow the law.”

Gowdy: “I’m asking you for a fact-pattern.”

Sewell: “I don’t, uh –”

Gowdy: “Can you give me a fact pattern where you would agree with what the 
bureau is asking you to do in California, whether it be nuclear weapons or a 
terrorist plot?”


Sewell: “I can’t imagine such a fact pattern.”

Gowdy: “Can you submit legislation, to Chairman Sensenbrenner’s question, that 
you would wholeheartedly support?”

Gowdy goes on to make one of the better points against Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>, which is that they already have 
quite a bit of influence congressionally and the legislature’s inaction on 
encryption doesn’t exactly have nothing to do with Apple’s interests. “We draft 
it and then your army of government relations folks opposes it, so I’m just 
trying to save us time. Why don’t you propose it? Tell us what you could agree 
to.”

“We’re willing to and we’ve offered to engage in this process,” Sewell says.
 
Congressman Lofgren, who represents Silicon Valley, is pretty contemptuous of 
Comey. “It’s a fool’s errand,” she says. “We’ll never be able to do what’s 
being asked of us by theFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi>.”

Again, strange bedfellows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/29/apple-fbi-encryption-battle-supporters-technology-politics>
 here: Ted Poe (again, a Texan Republican, and also a former judge) reiterates 
New York Democrat Jerrod Nadler’s point earlier that there’s a distinct 
possibility that Congress might simply tell Apple it can’t have encryption of 
the type it wants. “I actually agree with Mr Nadler; I know that’s going to 
bother him a little bit.”
 
Sewell tells Nadler he believes ordering Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> to unlock the iPhone both 
violates both the first amendment to the US constitution and the thirteenth 
(which abolished slavery in 1865).

“This is a compelled speech by the government for the purposes of the 
government which is absolutely a first amendment problem, and it is speech that 
Apple does not want to make,” he says. “And it is conscription; forced labor.”
 New York district attorney Cyrus Vance testifying before the House Judiciary 
Committee, seated next to encryption expert professor Susan Landau Photograph: 
Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images 
Darrell Issa makes a more utilitarian argument, echoing the point former FBI 
counterterrorism agent Mike German madeearlier in this blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/live/2016/mar/01/apple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live?page=with:block-56d5e2d8e4b0d0eebca058af#block-56d5e2d8e4b0d0eebca058af>
. “Have you ever ordered a shredding company to put paper back together?” he 
asks Vance.

Vance has to concede. “Of course I haven’t.”
 
Republican Jim Sensenbrenner, chairman of the judiciary committee, yells at 
Sewell for not bringing a bill with him to Congress.

“We have the iPhone of a dead terrorist!” he says. “You’ve come to us to ask 
us to do something, but you don’t know what you want us to do.” He theatrically 
yields his time in disgust, then Sewell tries to answer, then Sensenbrenner 
yells at him and yields his time again. It’s less impressive the second time.
 Congressman James Sensenbrenner Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images 
“I assume Apple will have legislative suggestions for us after the court makes 
its decision and Apple likes orApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> doesn’t like it,” Jerrold 
Nadler, a Democrat from New York, says after Sensenbrenner yields for real. He, 
too, isn’t happy with the one-device argument, and lights into Manhattan 
district attorney Cyrus Vance over it.

Vance has said he has 175 iPhones waiting to be unlocked, but the number has 
now risen to 205.

 * Thanks to reader Kevin Lee, who points out that Jerrold Nadler is from New 
York, not California, as previously stated
 
Here’s an interesting exchange highlighting one of the odd contours of the 
debate:there’s been a lot of discussion about cryptography that seems to 
suggest that there’s a difference between “breaking encryption,” whatever that 
means (sharing super-secret prime numbers? Unclear.) and weakening the passcode 
so that it can be brute forced, as Comey describes below, inless than half an 
hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/live/2016/mar/01/apple-fbi-congressional-hearing-live?page=with:block-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea#block-56d5f964e4b0d0eebca058ea>
.

Conyers gets at this asks by asking Sewell what the functional difference is 
between asking Apple to break its own encryption, and askingApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> to weaken the passcode 
protections.

“Functionally there is no difference,” Sewell says. “What we’re talking about 
is an operating system in which the passcode is an inherent and integrated part 
of the decryption system. That passcode is a cryptographic key.” So that’s your 
cryptography 101 lesson: you participate in encryption on an incredibly 
sophisticated level every time you punch in your passcode.

Back to the hearing: “I was hoping you’d go in that direction,” Conyers 
replies.

Sewell says that it is “absolutely false” that Apple no longer works with law 
enforcement. “The relationship with law enforcement falls within my shop at 
Apple and I’m incredibly proud of the work we do. We have dedicated individuals 
available around the clock.”

“This is not about the San Bernardino case,” Sewell tells Conyers. “This is 
about the safety and security of every iPhone.”


It’s probably safe to stop talking about the “one device” argument, made by 
Josh Earnest, among others, but Sewell kicks it one more time to make sure it’s 
stopped moving permanently: “There’s no distinction between a 5C and a 6 in 
this case. It is extensible, it is common, it is effectively the same.”
 
Goodlatte asks Sewell whether Comey’s assertion that Apple’s position is 
informed by its business model is “a fair contrast”.

“It’s by no means a fair contrast, Mr Chairman,” Sewell tells Goodlatte. He 
says he does not, in fact, agree with the characterization and says that 
hearing this described as a marketing issue “makes my blood boil”.

“I’ve heard this raised before. It was raised in New York, it was raised in 
San Bernardino. This is not a marketing issue, that’s a way of demeaning our 
argument. We don’t take out billboards for our security. We don’t take out ads 
for our encryption. We’re doing this because we think it’s the right thing to 
do. To say that it’s a marketing ploy to to say that it’s about PR really 
diminishes a very serious conversation that should be about security of the 
American people.”

It’s not quite true that Apple doesn’t advertise based on its security, but it 
is true thatApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> advertises its 
security as being non-annoying, rather than, say, so hard to break that you can 
sell drugs with impunity.

Sewell goes on to cites Orenstein’s decision from yesterday finding Apple 
“conscientious,” and says that in fact Apple is at war toimprove public safety. 
“We see ourselves as being in an arms race with crminals, cyberterrorists and 
hackers,” Sewell said.
 
The second panel is finally up. 

Bruce Sewell, general counsel for Apple, reads the statement released yesterday
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/29/apple-lawyer-fbi-bruce-sewell-more-crime>
, telling the committee that he “appreciate[s] your invitation and the 
opportunity to a part of the conversation on this issue.”

Sewell doesn’t say much to put Comey’s mind at ease, given his earlier remarks 
on what Comey sees as Apple’s attempt to usurp the FBI’s remit. “We share their 
goal of creating a safer world,” Sewell says, adding that the company 
cooperates often with law enforcement.
 Bruce Sewell, Apple general counsel, at the hearing Photograph: Joshua 
Roberts/Reuters 
Susan Landau, a former privacy analyst for Google, gives a very interesting 
testimony. Among other observations, she says that “smartphones are 
increasingly wallets” and points out that “NSA will tell you that stealing 
login credentials is the easiest way into a system,” a direct contradiction to 
the FBI’s assertion that what it’s asking is less harmful than to break 
encryption.

Landau also quotes words of wisdom she attributes to a former NSA colleague: 
“While the NSA has the right to break into a system, nobody ever guaranteed 
that it would be easy to do so,” she says. “TheFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> needs to take a page from the NSA.”
 
Finally, after three hours of condescending to the House of Representatives 
and being sniped at in return,FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> 
director James Comey is getting around to saying what he actually thinks about 
five minutes before he leaves the panel.

Hakeem Jeffries from Queens presses Comey on whether the Department of 
Justice’s characterization of Apple’s position as driven entirely by marketing 
and PR was as contemptuous as it sounded to Jeffries.

Comey responds that he thinks Apple’s market power “is not an illegitimate 
motive,” but he doesn’t like what they’re selling, because it essentially 
privatizes law enforcement. “It’s not their job to watch out for public 
safety,” he says shortly. “That’s our job.”

Comey also manages to state the opposition’s case very succintly in pushing 
back on a question from Jeffries about breaking into the phone; he also 
identifies where he takes issue with it: “I don’t agree with your framing,” he 
tells Jeffries. “It sounds like you’re saying you either have privacy or you 
have unfettered access and I don’t agree with that.”
 Congressman David Cicilline, speaking at a news conference on the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership in October 2015 Photograph: J. Scott Applewhite/AP 
Rhode Island democrat David Cicilline asks Comey if encryption law ought to 
come from the legislative branch rather than case law. “Do you agree that the 
authority has to come from Congress?” he asks.

Comey, for perhaps the first time, gives a flat negative. “No, I don’t agree 
with that.”
 
Comey’s case in a nutshell is that he does not want Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> to destroy its security and that 
the distinction is not a hairsplitting one.

We’re asking Apple to take the vicious guard dog away and let us pick the lock.

Suzan DeIbene tells Comey that the tension is not between privacy and security 
but between security and security, Comey replies, “You’ve said that very well, 
between privacy and security.”


“It’s not a technological problem - it’s a business model problem,” he said.
 
Cedric Richmond, Democrat from Louisiana’s second district, representing New 
Orleans, is present to discuss the case of a pregnant woman murdered by an 
unknown assailant; investigators have asked for access to her phone but have 
run up against encryption – she is believed to have kept a detailed diary on 
it. Comey has mentioned the case several times.

“We balance public safety and criminal justice; are we in danger of creating 
an underground criminal sanctuary for some very disturbed people?” Richmond 
asks Comey.


“Until this, there was no closet in America, no safe in America, no bank in 
America that could not be entered with a judge’s order. Until we drift to that 
place, we gotta talk about it.”

The case is not one that has been regularly mentioned up to this point; there 
is a case similar to the one described that was reported on in Louisiana last 
year.
 
FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> director James Comey:

“They’ve set out to make a phone that they can’t get into and they’re darn 
near succeeding. I think with the 6 and beyond, they would have succeeded. That 
doesn’t make them bad people.”
 
An interesting note from Comey: a brute force attack on the phone would take 
26 minutes, were Apple’s password-entry security measures defeated (again, see
our explainer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/20/apple-fbi-iphone-explainer-san-bernardino>
 for a little more detail on how this works).

And then Comey tells the committee he blames one man for his current 
predicament: Edward Snowden.

“Since Mr. Snowden’s revelations, terrorist tradecraft changed.” Terrorists 
tried to “wrap their lives in encryption,” he says, and as a result, “we’re 
looking for needles in a haystack, and the most important needles turn 
invisible.”


Steve King of Iowa brings up the Isis activity on Twitter, possibly, though 
his syntax is a little hard to decipher. “I’m interested in how the parameters 
that have been examined thoroughly by all the lawyers on this panel might apply 
to Isis, or any of their affiliates or subordinates that might be necessary if 
we’re going to defeat that ideology.”
 Congressman Steve King, seen with Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz 
Photograph: Mark Kauzlarich/Reuters 
King’s opinion appears to be that San Bernardino is small potatoes and that 
the American public ought to be more worried about “radical Islam” than even 
the constant discussion of Isis around Farook/Malik murders has made them.

“I think it’s known that Isis or Isil are seeking a nuclear device,” King 
tells Comey. “If that became part of the American consciousness, do you think 
that would change this debate?”

Comey does the thing he’s done so beautifully during the FBI’s messaging to 
the public, which is to plead for reasoned debate while reminding everybody 
that theFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> stands between them and 
anarchy. “I do worry that it’s hard to have nuanced complicated conversations 
like this in the wake of a disaster, which is why I think it’s so important 
that we have this conversation now.”

The director also rejects the contention that the FBI already has the 
technology and just wants precedent. “If we could have done this quietly and 
privately, we would have done it.”
 
James Comey has a friend! Trey Gowdy, the mind behind the Benghazi hearings, 
says that “I confess up front that my bias is toward public safety” when it 
comes to the need to balance the various rights conferred by the US 
constitution.

“You just can’t go in these categories [of device] unless somebody consents, 
really?” Gowdy asks, appalled. Comey agrees wholeheartedly with Gowdy’s outrage.

“I love privacy too but I want my fellow citizens to understand that we also 
love our bodies,” Gowdy says.
 Congressman Trey Gowdy Photograph: Corbis & Getty Images 
“If you have a bullet from an officer who was shot in a defendant, you can go 
to a judge and ask the defendant to anesthetize a patient and remove a that 
bullet from the body.” If that’s not unreasonable search and seizure, the South 
Carolina Republican asks, what is?

Gowdy is 100% wrong on this. 

The incident to which he appears to refer is a well-known Supreme Court case 
called Winston v Lee in which it was decided that the use of a previous high 
court decision, Schmerber v California, to mandate surgery to recover bullets 
against the will of a defendantwas unreasonable search and seizure.

“The proposed surgery would violate respondent’s right to be secure in his 
person and the search would be ‘unreasonable’ under the Fourth Amendment,”said 
the court <https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/470/753/case.html>.
 
Comey no longer seems at ease; when quizzed on the nature of the Fourth 
Amendment (which secures Americans against unreasonable search and seizure) he 
continually says he’s not a constitutional scholar, though he was district 
attorney for the southern district of New York. He then says that he thinks the 
framers of the constitution “wouldn’t have imaginedany box or storage area or 
device that couldn’t be entered <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TUVScBf8Znw>.”

He’s also clearly getting annoyed with the line of questioning. “People keep 
asking ‘Why didn’t you come to Congress?’” he says. “Well, because we’re in the 
middle of a terrorism investigation. I think the courts will resolve this 
faster than any legislative body could.”


He further takes the opportunity of being criticized for seeking judicial 
redress when he ought to have come to Congress in the opinion of the committee 
to praise the judiciary. “I have a number of friends who are magistrate judges, 
and they’re awesome and they think well and they rule well.”

“The world I imagine is a world in which people comply with warrants,” Comey 
says. “How they do it is up to them.”
 
We’re back, and the committee has resumed queuing up around Room 2141 of the 
Rayburn House Office Building to spank the director of theFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi>.

Jason Chaffetz of Utah asks Comey when historically the government has been 
able to compel a company to create a product to help it. Comey says he doesn’t 
know but cites one of the cases in the DoJ’s brief, New York Telephone. Comey 
is fairly short with him.
 Congressman Jason Chaffetz Photograph: Cliff Owen/AP 
Chaffetz then tells Comey he thinks the FBI already overreaches to a serious 
extent. “We can’t even see the degree to which you’re using Stingrays, or the 
requirements [to use them].” Chaffetz points out that the devices areapparently 
being supplied to the IRS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/26/stingray-surveillance-technology-irs-cellphone-tower>
 without any congressional oversight. What is the occasion of their use, he 
asks. “Is it articulable suspicion? Is it probable cause?”

“I don’t have a great answer,” Comey responds. “I like the idea of giving as 
much transparency as possible.”

The Guardian has repeatedly attempted to use the Freedom of Information Act to 
acquire records on the use of Stingrays from law enforcement and the documents 
received have without exception been redacted to remove all mention of the 
device.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/05/Beyond_email__could_startup_Slack_change_the_way_you_work_.txt

Erica Baker likes poker. So did many of the engineers she spent 10 years 
working with atGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, in the 
California headquarters of one of the world’s most valuable technology 
companies. When she was eventually invited to a poker night with other 
engineers, the group of white, male colleagues fell silent as she walked into 
the room. “That did not feel good,” she says. “I get that it’s comfortable to 
be around people like you, but it’s also pretty important to be around people 
who are not like you – it helps one grow as a human being. That was the point 
where I started to get fed up with Google.”

Around the same time, in late November 2014, Baker joined a local Black Lives 
Matter <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement> 
protest after the shooting of a black teenager by a white police officer. When 
she posted a photo toTwitter <https://mobile.twitter.com/ericajoy?lang=en-gb>, 
Stewart Butterfield <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stewart_Butterfield>, the 
co-founder ofSlack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/03/why-slack-is-worth-1bn-work-chat-app>
, a new chat tool for use at work, sent her a message: “Stay safe.” She says, 
“I just thought, ‘Holy crap – that’s a tech CEO!’ ” She left Google to join 
Slack as an engineer in May 2015.

'Everyone could know what I was doing': the millennials not using social media
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/01/millennials-not-on-social-media-twitter-facebook-instagram>
Silicon Valley <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> has 
developed plenty of folklore around tech CEOs; like Page, they tend to start 
out in a garage, drop out of college, and within a few years metamorphose from 
boychild prodigy to omnipotent genius.

Butterfield’s story is a little different. He was born on a hippy commune in 
Canada and christened Dharma Butterfield. He studied philosophy at Cambridge 
University and, after various design and product development roles, 
accidentally came up with the photo-sharing siteFlickr <https://www.flickr.com/>
 while trying to build a game. (Slack came up in the same way, a side project 
of a game called Glitch.)

Slack <https://slack.com> is part of a wave of technologies trying to change 
the way we communicate, enabling continuous, fluid, more natural conversations 
to replace restrictive and time-consuming emails. Already, more than 2.3 
million people use it every day, sending 1.5bn messages every month. Despite 
being just two years old, Slack is already valued at $2.8bn, a figure that 
makes itthe fastest-growing business-to-business company in history 
<http://www.techinsider.io/fastest-companies-to-reach-a-2-billion-valuation-2015-5>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d6c0faab7bd2f4154f96013269f7a2c91081739%2F644_2309_2330_1397%2F2330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d6c0faab7bd2f4154f96013269f7a2c91081739%2F644_2309_2330_1397%2F2330.jpg>
 ‘It’s important to be around people who are not like you,’ says engineer Erica 
Baker. ‘It helps one grow as a human being.’ Photograph: Winni Wintermeyer for 
the Guardian 
Cut the formality 

When I meet Butterfield, wearily hunched over a meeting room desk, he swears 
he’ll never attempt to design another game. The California sun is pouring into 
Slack’s spacious, quiet office, the odd emoji balloon hovering above the desks.

Perhaps unusually for a CEO, Butterfield doesn’t think a business should be 
all about making money: “People don’t work for money. It’s a way of 
establishing the health of the machine, of diagnosing how the machine is 
performing, but it’s not necessarily the goal. They get a lot of purpose and 
identity from work, yet most people are unhappy there. They feel work isn’t 
taking advantage of everything they have to offer, that they are more 
resourceful, intelligent, creative or capable. The formality of how people 
speak to each other is a constraint, so their job doesn’t let them be their 
whole self.”

Email is hierarchical, it's great for political maneuvering, but how often is 
there deep collaboration and sharing?
Dr Leah Reich 
Slack is sometimes described as an email killer, which might be as much an 
ardent prayer as anything else.Research by the Radicati Group 
<http://www.radicati.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Email-Statistics-Report-2015-2019-Executive-Summary.pdf>
 estimated that nearly 2.6 billion people used email worldwide as of 2015, each 
sending and receiving an average of 122 emails a day at work alone. Email is 
frequently cited as a major drain on productivity; Slack claims its users 
report receiving 48.6% less internal email after they start using the tool.

Dr Leah Reich <http://www.leahreich.com>, a sociologist and Slack’s user 
researcher, argues that email represents an older generation of workers and an 
outmoded way of communicating: “Email is hierarchical and compartmentalized, 
and great for political maneuvering.” Blind copying, or the bcc, is an example 
of that: your boss could be silently copied into an email chain. Email allows 
the sender to choose who to send information to, and who to exclude. It is also 
loaded with letter-writing conventions, expectations that we must reply and 
include a formal greeting. We should cut that formality and replace it with 
fast exchanges of ideas, Reich says. “How often is there deep collaboration and 
sharing on email? That weird overlapping feeling of ideas and iteration and 
design thinking? That’s still new to a lot of people. It’s radical 
collaboration, a different way of working and thinking.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d952fa0cd7b38fa725c9d7497981a0d354b2d1a%2F0_1548_3900_2344%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d952fa0cd7b38fa725c9d7497981a0d354b2d1a%2F0_1548_3900_2344%2F3900.jpg>
 ‘The formality of how people speak to each other is a constraint, so their job 
doesn’t let them be their whole self,’ says Slack CEO Stewart Butterfield. 
Photograph: Winni Wintermeyer for the Guardian 
Reich has been using online chat since 1992, when she inhabited some fairly 
niche chat rooms on the east coast dedicated to raves. She argues that the 
workforce today includes a generation who are used to less hierarchical 
communication and very good at chat. “They are simply not entrenched in email 
the same way we are,” she says. “Companies realize they need to have the tools 
people are used to using.”

Facebook Messenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/10/facebook-messenger-app-removing-chat>
, Google Chat,WhatsApp <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp> and 
many other messaging applications have changed the way we communicate; WhatsApp 
alone has 1 billion monthly users.Research in 2014 by Pew 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/08/06/teens-technology-and-friendships/> found 
that 49% of teens used texting as their primary way of talking to their closest 
friend, compared with 20% on social media and only 13% by phone. Texting and 
chat messaging may once have been the domain of the young, but those teenagers 
are growing up – and companies want to look progressive to attract young 
talent. Slack aims to create a new norm for how we communicate at work: a 
ubiquitous, informal chat that feels like an extension of the reflexive 
personalities we construct on our social media accounts; all that is seeping 
into work now, too.

People get a lot of purpose and identity from work, yet most people are 
unhappy there
Stewart Butterfield 
Slack is nothing like conventional work software; it is bright, fast and 
stuffed with emojis. Most users receive an invite from someone else at work to 
join a “team”, and once they have Slack’s app on their desktop or mobile, 
they’ll see channels dedicated to different topics, private channels for 
invited groups, and direct messages. There is typically one main channel that 
acts like a common room, and offshoots for groups or projects. Slack’s own 
corporate team has 1,064 channels for its 356 staff, including the novelty 
channels #happyplace for pictures of cute animals, #theoldgodsandthenew for 
Game Of Thrones and TV chat, and #socks for pictures of the day’s footwear. 
Users can also send files and emojis, and add any of the 280 tools that can be 
plugged into Slack, including proofreading, to-do lists, calendars and Skype; 
you can even order an Uber through a chat message.


Ardent users praise Slack’s warmth and humor, credited largely to editorial 
director Anna Pickard 
<https://twitter.com/annapickard?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, a former Guardian journalist who has used her master’s degree in dramaturgy 
to “specialize in giving things a voice”. From its marketing and advertising to 
error messages, Slack has a gentle, accessible humor that isn’t topical or 
ingratiating, and doesn’t use in-jokes. One error message reads: “We’ve seen 
this problem clear up with a restart of your browser, a solution which we 
suggest to you now only with great regret and self-loathing.”

Breaking the boys’ club 

The technology is gaining popularity largely because curious, tech-inclined 
people start using it, and convince their bosses to pay for an upgrade the 
whole firm can use. This bottom-up strategy looks risky on paper, but is 
working beyond anyone’s expectations. Clients now include the Wall Street 
Journal, Samsung, Harvard and Nasa’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80c953f7a6582f4f039e0bac35f9f6fa578470ea%2F446_1349_2849_3886%2F2849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80c953f7a6582f4f039e0bac35f9f6fa578470ea%2F446_1349_2849_3886%2F2849.jpg>
 Sociologist Dr Leah Reich thinks we should cut the formality of email and 
replace it with fast exchanges of ideas. Photograph: Winni Wintermeyer for the 
Guardian 
Despite being founded by four white men, Slack has defied Silicon Valley’s 
self-reinforcing recruitment patterns to create probably the most diverse 
company in tech’s top tier. It feels like a company run by grownups; there is 
no ping pong at its San Francisco HQ, and its brand of conscientious, 
thoughtful culture has attracted staff such as Erica Baker.

Baker is very active in promoting diversity; she requested that Slack remove 
the requirement of 10 years’ experience from job specs because it has been 
proven to deter women from applying, and pushed for the inclusion of emojis 
with different skin tones. Baker has been working in technical roles for 15 
years, and now advises the Bay Area’sHack the Hood <http://www.hackthehood.org/>
 project on helping kids from low-income families work towards jobs in 
technology, and is a mentor forBlack Girls Code <http://www.blackgirlscode.com/>
.

Butterfield is well known in the tech industry for being a charismatic CEO, 
but less well known for being propelled by a team of formidable women.Anne Toth 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/clean_freak?lang=en-gb>, head of Slack’s people and 
policy, was the first person in Silicon Valley to be employed to work on the 
complex legal and policy issues around privacy back in 1996 atYahoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/yahoo>. She met Butterfield in 2005, 
when Yahoo boughtFlickr <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/flickr>. He now 
says he regrets selling, his eyes rolling when he talks about Yahoo’s corporate 
culture, in his view rife with executives consumed by power battles. He stayed 
running Flickr until July 2008 and then spent eight months on a break; his 
LinkedIn profile of the time says “Unemployed person – the great outdoors”. 
Many Slack staff have similar stories of enduring unhappy or unfulfilling work 
environments, but Toth says they have shaped how they wanted the company to 
grow: “We want to build the kind of company we want to work at. To show that 
you can break a mould and be successful.”

When she joined, Toth encouraged the executive team to make a plan about 
company values, which might seem like the kind of nauseating marketing exercise 
no one takes any notice of, but which Slack has done with great sincerity. 
“When you walk into a company and see words such as ‘excellence’ and 
‘integrity’ on the wall, it doesn’t feel authentic,” Toth says. “We didn’t want 
it to feel like marketing.” Slack was recruiting rapidly and needed to define a 
sensibility that, until then, had been “osmotically transmitted” from the 
personality of the founders; they came up with craftsmanship, courtesy, 
playfulness, thriving, solidarity and empathy. Those ideals inform how 
management makes decisions every day, from prioritizing broken code 
(craftsmanship) to making sure everyone leaves work on time (thriving).

Rather than reinforce the idea engineers look like Mark Zuckerberg, we 
introduce powerful women who happen to be black
Anne Toth 
As Slack’s senior staff recruited, they wanted to challenge any unconscious 
bias, Toth explains. “Some people think you make better products if you have a 
more diverse workforce, some think you get better business results with a more 
diverse workforce, and some think it is more a matter of social justice, that 
it is our obligation. Rather than reinforce the notion that an engineer looks 
likeMark Zuckerberg <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>, 
we can introduce four powerful women who happen to be black. It changes the 
idea of what an engineer looks like.”

The company’s latest diversity report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/04/slack-diversity-report-silicon-valley>
 showed that 43.1% of the staff are female, 43% of senior management are 
female, 13% of staff identify as LGBT and 7.8% of staff in engineering roles 
identify as black. It’s not designed to be self-congratulatory, they say, 
because these numbers still don’t reflect the real world, but it is a 
significant improvement on the biggest tech companies: Google, Facebook and 
Twitter all report that 1% of engineers are black.

I, narcissist – vanity, social media, and the human condition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/i-narcissist-vanity-social-media-and-the-human-condition>
Slack may be small – less than 1% of the number of employees of Google – but 
its slightly older, more experienced management team is instinctively 
challenging recruitment processes they know haven’t worked.Merci Grace 
<https://twitter.com/merci?lang=en>, Slack’s group product manager for growth, 
recently worked alongside an external recruiter who asked which three colleges 
she should recruit from. “I had to explain that we don’t do that, because all 
you are doing is pulling people out of a funnel of privilege. We want people 
who are kind and empathetic and smart.” Grace is one of many senior Slackers 
with an arts degree, and started her own games company. She felt ground down by 
the implicitly masculine culture, she says; one hiring manager said he hadn’t 
given a job to a woman because he wanted “an alpha dog”. Along with many others 
on the staff (Slack typically hires people in their early 30s rather than their 
20s), Grace has been through the phase of working 18-hour days and sleeping 
under the desk, and come out the other side. Yet the pervasive culture of 
working extreme hours persists. “Just because your ass is on a seat doesn’t 
mean you’re working. If you’re brain dead after 6pm, go home. You can work like 
that for only so long.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8beff44fe259c5e0344bf90cf0727accdb55486e%2F0_364_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8beff44fe259c5e0344bf90cf0727accdb55486e%2F0_364_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 ‘When people come here, we expect them to have a life,’ says Anne Toth, 
Slack’s head of people and policy. ‘We hired someone from Facebook and he 
couldn’t believe that the place emptied out at 6pm.’ Photograph: Winni 
Wintermeyer for the Guardian 
Part of that process of recruiting has been gently to pick at the valley’s 
culture of machismo. There are no “rock star” developers or “ninjas” at Slack. 
They do not “crush it”, and they do not call everyone “guys”, because not 
everyone is a guy – they prefer the term “sibs”, as in siblings. Ali Rayl, 
Slack’s director of customer experience, points out that Slack’s “work hard and 
go home” culture is also better for women. “It allows them to say, ‘I can do 
this job. I can emulate the founders in the way I work and not get punished for 
it. And I can take care of my family.’ When people come here, we expect them to 
have a life. We hired someone from Facebook and he couldn’t believe that the 
place emptied out at 6pm.”

What comes next?

Slack is high on the giddy enthusiasm of Silicon Valley investors and early 
adopting techies. But everyone is painfully aware that this is a very young 
company in a very aggressive industry, and things could all change. Many of the 
staff are unusually candid in describing this intense pressure; Rayl says it’s 
a “constant low-grade terror that I might screw something up”; Butterfield 
tells staff it will never get better than this. Slack is the flavor of 2016, 
but could it become more than that?

We have a system that encourages people to think of themselves as soloists… 
that success requires someone’s failure
Margaret Heffernan 
Anil Dash <http://anildash.com/about.html>, a writer and entrepreneur who has 
followed Slack since it began, says one of its biggest challenges will be 
navigating the “ordinary dysfunction” of large companies. Having used Slack to 
co-ordinate projects with 20 different companies, Dash observes that companies 
in crisis typically use more private messages and less open discussion. Rather 
than shape the way we communicate, technology reflects our existing 
insecurities and behavior. The more confident workers feel, the more happy they 
are to engage in discussion and collaboration out in the open.

Entrepreneur and author Margaret Heffernan 
<http://www.mheffernan.com/index2.php> questions whether software could ever 
solve what is fundamentally a human problem. “We have an education system that 
encourages people to think of themselves as soloists – their success actually 
requires someone else’s failure.” These soloists create friction and 
competitiveness, she says, which often takes precedence over collaboration.

Slack needs buy-in from corporate America if it is to succeed, and while 
Silicon Valley has always been hugely influential in working culture, from 
open-plan offices and standing desks to free perks and bonding sessions, is the 
business world really ready to upgrade its social skills? Isn’t radical 
collaboration one step too far?

Erica Baker doesn’t think so. I ask her what she might tell her nieces about 
her work in 50 years’ time. “I’d say your auntie helped change an industry. And 
that she doesn’t have to work any more,” she says, with the confidence of a 
woman who senses a public offering over the horizon. “Well, we’re the 
fastest-growing enterprise company in the world, so there’s a good chance. 
That’s just honest.”👌🏽
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/05/Italy_referendum_Q_A__the_big_economic_questions_answered.txt

Italians are voting in a referendum on 4 December that is causing concern 
across Europe after the UK’s vote to leave the EU and Donald Trump’s US 
presidential election victory. The votecould lead to the resignation of Matteo 
Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/after-trump-victory-italy-referendum-is-seen-as-test-of-populisms-rise>
, the prime minister. However, the fallout from a no vote on Sunday could be 
economic and financial as well as political.

Why are financial markets worried about Sunday’s referendum?

Italy’s vote is seen as the biggest threat to Europe since the UK’s referendum 
on EU membership in June <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. 
The fear is that a vote against the government could trigger a chain of events 
that might see Italy – a member of the EU since its inception – spiral out of 
the single currency.

But isn’t the referendum on a narrow political issue?

It is and it isn’t. The referendum is about constitutional changes but is also 
seen as a vote of confidence in Renzi. The proposed changes to parliament are 
part of his attempts to modernise Italy, both politically and economically. 
Markets like Renzi’s technocratic approach; they think he is needed to sort out 
the deep-seated problems of Italy’s banks – the weakest in the eurozone – and 
are worried because he haspledged to quit if the referendum is lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/matteo-renzi-repeats-vow-quit-italian-pm-loses-referendum>
.


Related: After Trump victory, Italy referendum is seen as test of populism's 
rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/after-trump-victory-italy-referendum-is-seen-as-test-of-populisms-rise>

Markets fear that defeat for Renzi would trigger a general election that could 
result in power shifting to theFive Star Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/five-star-movement>. An anti-establishment 
party formed by former standup comedianBeppe Grillo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/beppe-grillo>, it has suggested it would 
call a referendum on membership of the EU.

“With a wave of elections in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in 2017, such a shift in 
sentiment would undermine political integration and increase demand for 
national sovereignty,” said analysts at Jefferies.

What’s wrong with the economy?

Pretty much everything. Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> has an 
unemployment rate of 11% and living standards have barely grown since the 
country became a founder member of the single currency 15 years ago.

Nine years after the onset of the financial crisis in 2007, output remains 8% 
down on its pre-crash level. Shweta Singh, of Lombard Street Research, said 
Italy’s weakness since the turn of the millennium was the result of three 
factors: a slow takeup of new information technology; the inability of the 
government to devalue the currency to restore competitiveness; and the 
challenge posed by China in many of the markets where Italy has traditionally 
been strong.

“Italy’s share of global exports has plummeted,” Singh said. “Since the turn 
of the century, Italy has lost more market share than most developed countries, 
including those in the euro area.”
 Matteo Renzi campaigning for a yes vote. Photograph: Andrew Medichini/AP 
What’s wrong with the banks?

They are in “terrible shape”, according to Kathleen Brooks, research director 
at City Index. The country’s banking system is fragmented, with more branches 
than restaurants dotted across its high streets. They are weighed down by 
€360bn (£305bn) of bad debts.

The industry took too long to tackle the mountain of bad debts and by the time 
the regulators wanted action a change in EU rules meant it was difficult to set 
up a “bad bank”. Renzi is credited with helping devise a solution, creating a
backstop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/battle-prop-up-italy-banks-eu-brexit-grexit-bad-loans>
 fund – known as Atlante – for the industry.

Related: Italy referendum: all you need to know about Renzi's crunch vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/italy-referendum-all-you-need-to-know-about-renzis-crunch-vote>

Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena, the world’s oldest bank, is also one of 
European weakest afterstress tests imposed by the European Banking Authority in 
July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/rescue-package-in-place-as-europes-oldest-bank-fails-stress-tests>
 showed its financial strength would be sapped if markets came under strain. A 
bailout plan is in train.

So what will happen if there is a no vote?

The anxiety is that the banks will crumble. Brooks said: “If [Renzi] loses the 
referendum and resigns, then the big question for traders will be if the 
bailout plan still stands. If not, then eight of Italy’s lenders could be at 
risk of collapse.

“Due to the interconnectedness of the global banking system, and the weakness 
of some other European lendersnotably Deutsche Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/27/deutsche-bank-how-did-a-beast-of-the-banking-world-get-into-this-mess>
, a collapse in Italy’s banking system could lead to intense pressure on global 
financial stocks in the aftermath of a no vote.”

Wouldn’t the European Central Bank do something? 

Almost certainly. The ECB buys €80bn of eurozone bonds each month and in the 
short term would make buying Italian bonds a priority. That might limit the 
upward movement in bond yields – the interest paid on government debt. The 
European commission would also be under pressure to soften rules that put 
restrictions on individual governments bailing out their banks.

If there is a yes vote does that mean it is a case of crisis over?

Almost certainly not. There might be a relief rally and the shares of 
Unicredit and Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena could bounce after recent 
selling, but the problems of the Italian economy and the country’s banking 
system will remain. The key issue of whether Italy can live with the pressures 
of eurozone membership will be unresolved.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/05/We_need_to_save_our_cities__The_fate_of_the_Corkman_pub_and_Sirius_is_social__destruction.txt

The destruction of the Corkman Irish Pub in inner-city Melbourne should focus 
attention on what’s being done to Australia’s cities.

The hotel – once known as the Carlton Inn – dated back to 1857. A recent 
heritage report assessed it as “of historic and aesthetic significance to the 
City of Melbourne”.

Nevertheless, last Saturday, a team from Shaq Demolition and Excavation 
systematically reduced the pub – the oldest building in the suburb – to piles 
of unrecognisable rubble.

Back in 1878, the designer and poet William Morris bemoaned the architectural 
carnage under way in the London of his day.

Unions issue blanket ban on work at site of illegally demolished Melbourne pub
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/20/unions-issue-blanket-ban-on-work-at-site-of-illegally-demolished-melbourne-pub>
“Surely an opulent city,” he wrote, “the capital of the commercial world, can 
afford some small sacrifice to spare these beautiful buildings the little plots 
of ground upon which they stand. Is it absolutely necessary that every scrap of 
space in the city should be devoted to moneymaking …?”

The widespread horror at the Corkman’s destruction reflects a similar 
sentiment, a generalised belief that we all have a stake in the communities in 
which we live and in the streets on which we walk; that the significant 
architecture around us remains, in some sense, a collective possession and thus 
its fate affects all of us.

But such ideas are quite foreign to the imperatives reshaping our cities today.

In 2014, the Corkman sold at auction for $4.8m, a sum that, at $1,760,000 
above the stated reserve, reflected the extraordinary inflation of real 
property in the inner city.

Its purchasers presumably decided that, as owners, they possessed an absolute 
right to do whatsoever they pleased with their new acquisition. Yes, they 
understood they’d be fined for trashing the pub but they no doubt factored the 
likely penalty into their calculations as an externality and then figured 
they’d still come out in the black.

The planning minister, Richard Wynne, has blamed the demolition on “cavalier 
cowboy developers”. In one sense, he’s obviously right, given that Shaq 
Demolition lacked permission to destroy the hotel. In another sense, though, 
Saturday’s little manoeuvre reflected an attitude that’s depressingly 
mainstream.

After all, only a few weeks ago, Liberal senator James Paterson caused a stir 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/sell-blue-poles-and-end-public-funding-for-sport-and-the-arts-says-liberal-senator-james-paterson-20161006-grww1s.html>
 by proposing the liquidation of Jackson Pollock’s Blue Poles to pay government 
debt.

An alumnus of the Institute for Public Affairs, Paterson was, one assumes, 
less interested in actually flogging off the canvas than in propagandising a 
general principle: simply, that value (of a painting or anything else) should 
be assessed exclusively in dollars and cents.

Clearly, the owners of the Corkman agreed. For them, a rare example of 19th 
century architecture mattered only in so far as it might make them a buck.

Now, the free market system rests on the proposition that private greed 
collectively contributes to the public welfare. As Adam Smith famously says in 
The Wealth of Nations, “It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the 
brewer or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their 
own interest.”

Individual developers might thus seek nothing except their own profits but 
that, you see, doesn’t matter because, in aggregation, they’ll build a liveable 
city for us all.

Or so the theory goes.

In fact, the fate of the Corkman illustrates the reality of the process 
underway in Melbourne (and everywhere else).

It’s not simply that a historic building’s been lost forever. It’s also that, 
as everyone knows, the site will be eventually transformed into glitzy 
apartments that ordinary people will never be able to afford.

After all, as the TrustAdvocate blog notes 
<http://www.trustadvocate.org.au/the-life-and-death-of-the-corkman-hotel/>, 
demolition wasn’t the only threat to the Corkman.

“A pub is not just bricks and mortar,” it argues. “It’s a gathering place for 
a community.”

Or, to put it another way, the physical destruction of our suburbs generally 
follows what we might call their social destruction, as the places in which 
ordinary people once lived are transformed into sterile playgrounds for the 
super rich.

The blog cites a Melbourne University student quoted on a change.org petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/city-of-melbourne-resurrect-the-corkman-pub> in 
defence of the Corkman:

Yes, the reason why we all went there was because it was ludicrously close to 
the building in which we spent all of our other waking hours. But that 
closeness meant that everybody went there. And that everybody went there meant 
that a community existed. We all made great friendships while getting sloshed 
in the afternoon in that courtyard.

For the first half of the 20th century, Carlton was a slum – before, with the 
expansion of higher education, it became a home for students, bohemians and 
artists. Today, it’s priced out of the range of everyone except the wealthy.

Obviously, the imperatives of the market foster a certain kind of development, 
spurred by profit rather than need.

Again, Melbourne provides a striking illustration. Over the last years, a 
small army of the homeless has established semi-permanent encampments 
throughout the CBD.A recent study suggests 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-06-09/rough-sleepers-in-melbourne-up-74-per-cent-in-two-years-survey/7495502>
 that the number of people sleeping rough has increased by 74% compared with 
just two years ago.

The green bans remain a striking example of a collective response to what’s 
now known as gentrification

Yet the emergence of these cardboard shanties under bridges and in city 
doorways doesn’t correlate with any absolute shortage of housing in Melbourne. 
On the contrary, the city’s witnessing a frenzy of apartment construction, with 
high rise buildings creeping skyward almost everywhere. Yet a 2016 study by 
Prosper Australia found that many of the new buildings remain largely empty,as 
speculators bank on continually rising prices 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/victoria/massive-number-of-melbourne-homes-are-lying-vacant-angering-homeless-agencies/news-story/86c1de02ada02dce7c9b1bca9f6b147d>
.

That’s why Malcolm Turnbull’s attempt to blame the shortage of affordable 
housing on trade unions is so risible.

“[Labor] doesn’t stand for the young couples that can’t afford to buy a house 
because the costs have been pushed up by union thuggery,”he declared this week 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/markdistefano/turnbull-housing-unions>, “or taxpayers 
that have to pay more to build every type of infrastructure.”

The implication is that, if bosses can keep their costs down, they’ll pass the 
benefits on to consumers and the wider society.

Of course, there’s no evidence for that at all. On the contrary, as Ralph 
Horne and Megan Nethercote argue 
<https://theconversation.com/life-in-a-windowless-box-the-vertical-slums-of-melbourne-41181>
, the economic bonanza being enjoyed by inner city property developers is 
resulting in the production of badly designed and overpriced “vertical slums”.

Moreover, the Corkman saga shows what the campaign to deregulate the building 
sector means for workers.

We now know that the late night destruction of the hotel proceeded despite the 
presence of potentially deadly asbestos in the site.

The presence of the carcinogen illustrates why safety remains such a 
preoccupation of those employed in construction – an industry in which,as Dave 
Noonan from the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union points out 
<https://sourceable.net/three-dead-construction-workers-in-four-days/>, three 
workers were recently killed within four days.

The union’s placed a so-called “green ban” on the Corkman site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/20/unions-issue-blanket-ban-on-work-at-site-of-illegally-demolished-melbourne-pub>
, in an echo of a very different approach to both heritage and housing 
affordability, pioneered by building workers themselves.

“Green bans” were a concept established by the NSW Builders Labourers 
Federation in the 1970s, in the midst of an earlier boom of inner city 
construction.

Under the leadership of charismatic activists like Jack Mundey, Joe Owens and 
Bob Pringle, the BLF melded the industrial orientation of the old left with the 
emerging sensibilities of the new left, pledging that its members’ labour would 
not be used to damage the city or its inhabitants.

As Mundey explained <http://dictionaryofsydney.org/entry/green_bans_movement> 
to the Sydney Morning Herald in 1972:

Yes, we want to build. However, we prefer to build urgently-required 
hospitals, schools, other public utilities, high-quality flats, units and 
houses, provided they are designed with adequate concern for the environment, 
than to build ugly unimaginative architecturally-bankrupt blocks of concrete 
and glass offices …

Though we want all our members employed, we will not just become robots 
directed by developer-builders who value the dollar at the expense of the 
environment. More and more, we are going to determine which buildings we will 
build … The environmental interests of three million people are at stake and 
cannot be left to developers and building employers whose main concern is 
making profit. Progressive unions, like ours, therefore have a very useful 
social role to play in the citizens’ interest, and we intend to play it.

Victoria plans harsher penalties for 'cowboy developers' after historic pub 
demolished
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/18/victoria-plans-harsher-penalties-for-cowboy-developers-after-historic-pub-demolished>
Before the BLF was deregistered in 1975 (after a concerted campaign from 
construction companies, the government and more conservative unionists), more 
than 40 green bans were imposed (in consultation with the community) to 
preserve parks, areas of bushland and historical buildings. It’s not an 
exaggeration to say that, without the bans, great swathes of Sydney’s heritage 
would have disappeared under the bulldozers.

In its most spectacular action, the BLF prevented a planned redevelopment of 
The Rocks, thus saving some of the oldest buildings in the city while 
protecting the interests of those working class families still resident in the 
area.

In keeping with the times, however, the NSW Baird government has recently 
undone much of this work,selling off hundreds of heritage homes in Miller’s 
Point 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/harbourside-properties-to-be-sold-off-by-state-government/news-story/ac1e08e17b2c46bf462593ee00307551>
 as well as the iconicSirius building despite intense public opposition 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/nsw-act/news/why-are-so-many-people-fighting-to-protect-sydney-eyesore/news-story/b4b5a3ff3abbd9df607e5e9b421b1034>
. As a result, working class people have effectively been evicted from this 
part of historic Sydney. The CFMEU imposed a green ban on the Sirius building 
in September in an attempt to prevent the building’s demolition.

Of course, it’s not possible to click one’s fingers and recapture the spirit 
of 1972.

Nevertheless, the green bans remain a striking example of a collective 
response to what’s now known as gentrification, an illustration that the 
protection of our common heritage can go hand-in-hand with the preservation of 
our communities.

The fate of the Corkman shows that we urgently need something similar today.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/07/Barnaby_Joyce_says__inoperable__Senate_may_trigger_double_dissolution_election.txt

The new deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce>, believes he can 
prevail over cabinet colleagues as the Nationals renew their push to strengthen 
Australia’s competition laws.

Joyce made the prediction on the eve of a new parliamentary sitting fortnight 
while also warning the Senate against obstructing the Turnbull government’s 
agenda.

Double dissolution is a 'live option' as Morrison rules out 'pixie horse' tax 
cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/double-dissolution-is-a-live-option-as-morrison-rules-out-pixie-horse-tax-cuts>
The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> 
government kept the option of calling a double-dissolution election up its 
sleeve, he said, and could pull the trigger if the Senate “becomes inoperable”.

The tough talking from the new leader of the Nationals comes as the government 
struggles to spell out a clear direction on tax policy butedges closer to 
amending Senate voting laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/senate-voting-reform-stirs-up-hornets-nest-between-likely-winners-and-losers>
 to curb the influence of “micro-parties”.

Joyce used a wide-ranging interview with Sky News to signal that the Nationals 
would not drop their push for action on the so-called effects test, a provision 
aimed at better protecting small businesses from the misuse of market power.

Section 46 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/caca2010265/s46.html> of the 
Competition and Consumer Act prohibits big corporations, such as Coles and 
Woolworths, from taking advantage of substantial market power “for the purpose” 
of eliminating competitors.

A review of competition laws, headed by Prof Ian Harper, called for the 
prohibition to be expanded to include actions that would be likely to “have the 
effect” of substantially lessening competition. This is seen as an easier 
threshold to prove in court.

The Abbott and Turnbull governments both delayed decisions on the proposed 
change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/01/coalition-selling-out-small-business-to-big-end-of-town-say-lobbyists>
 amidheavy lobbying by big business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/07/small-business-flags-anti-coalition-campaign-in-key-marginal-seats>
, which argued the move could harm price competition and create uncertainty. 
Ministers weredeeply divided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/01/bruce-billson-says-big-business-could-be-appeased-by-tougher-competition-laws>
.

But the issue is set to be revisited soon with the treasurer, Scott Morrison, 
having set a March deadline for the government to make a final decision on 
section 46.


Joyce called on the government to protect small business, which he described 
as a “core constituency” of the Liberal and National parties.

He said he was concerned about small businesses being “pushed around by people 
who are not beating them by reason of competition, who are beating them just 
because they’re bigger and knocking them out just to get rid of them”.

“We want to always make sure that that constituency clearly sees us as 
fighting on their behalf,” he told the Australian Agenda program on Sunday. 
“Our goal remains the same that we will try and we will deliver some form of 
betterment so that people who are in business, small business, can be treated 
in a fairer way.”

Pressed on whether he believed he could prevail on this issue, Joyce said: 
“Yeah, I do. I do.”


The resumption of parliament on Monday marks the first test of Turnbull’s new 
ministerial line-up after changes triggered by theleadership change at the top 
of the Nationals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/barnaby-joyce-to-be-sworn-in-as-deputy-prime-minister-after-nationals-meeting>
 andscandals involving several Liberals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/stuart-robert-loses-job-as-minister-following-china-trip-furore>
.

Barnaby Joyce, the man who threatened Johnny Depp's dogs, voted deputy PM
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/barnaby-joyce-the-man-who-threatened-johnny-depps-dogs-voted-deputy-pm>
Joyce, who replaced the retiring Warren Truss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/cabinet-reshuffle-nationals-to-vote-for-new-leader-on-thursday-evening>
 as leader of the Nationals and was sworn in as deputy prime minister on 
Thursday, added weight tospeculation about a possible double-dissolution 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/double-dissolution-is-a-live-option-as-morrison-rules-out-pixie-horse-tax-cuts>
 in July.

“What I can say is any time after July there’s the possibility [of an 
election] and it really is up to the Senate as to whether we have a progression 
of policy through, whether we have the capacity to get on with the job of 
turning the nation around and putting ourselves in a strong financial position 
for the future,” he said.

“But if it becomes inoperable, then we have, we have a right, a constitutional 
right, to go to a double dissolution and we’ll always keep that option up our 
sleeve.”

The leader of the house, Christopher Pyne, said last week that a double 
dissolution triggered by the Coalition’s stalled workplace relations 
legislation was a “live option” while Turnbull said the mechanism was 
“available”.

The earliest date for a normal general election for the House of 
Representatives and half of the Senate is 6 August but the constitution gives 
the government the option ofdissolving both houses to resolve legislative 
deadlocks 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/about_parliament/house_of_representatives/powers_practice_and_procedure/00_-_infosheets/infosheet_18_-_double_dissolution>
.

This would be a high-stakes decision and the timetable is difficult.

The government has indicated its tax reform plans will be spelled out in the 
budget, due on 10 May, but the latest possible day to invoke a double 
dissolution would be 11 May. This is because the dissolution of both houses 
cannot be requested in the last six months of a parliament.

If Turnbull pulls the trigger straight after the budget, he could opt for an 
unusually long election campaign with polling day deferred to Julyprevent the 
Senate and House of Representatives terms from getting out of alignment 
<http://blogs.abc.net.au/antonygreen/2015/12/the-turnbull-governments-options-for-a-2016-election.html>
.

The government is working with the Greens and the independent senator Nick 
Xenophon onlegislation to change Senate voting rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/senate-voting-changes-coalition-wins-over-nick-xenophon-and-greens>
 to counter secretive preference deals, which, if passed, would increase the 
appeal of dissolving both houses because it would force all of the crossbench 
senators to face the people.

The Coalition’s attempt to create a registered organisations commission to 
crack down on unions already provides the government with a trigger, because 
the same bill has been rejected in two Senate votes held more than three months 
apart.

The government is also preparing to try again to get Senate support to 
reintroduce the Howard-era Australian Building and Construction Commission, 
which if blocked would create another trigger. ASenate inquiry report 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Education_and_Employment/Building_and_Construction>
 on this legislation is due on 15 March.

Labor accused the government of being “all waffle and no action” after 
Morrison told the National Press Club people should expect only “modest” tax 
reform in the budget.

Scott Morrison says Labor 'selling a unicorn' with negative gearing savings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/scott-morrison-says-labor-selling-a-unicorn-with-negative-gearing-savings>
The opposition, which has spent the past week campaigning for its plan to 
restrict negative gearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/13/labor-promises-to-cut-negative-gearing-and-capital-gains-tax-concessions>
 to newly constructed homes, is likely to use parliamentary question time to 
pursue the inaction theme.

News Corp’s Sunday tabloids reported 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/negative-gearing-prime-minister-turnbull-works-on-option-to-exempt-mum-and-dad-investors/news-story/a804309e9bd56c438c990dedb9e0ff46>
 the government was looking at a less ambitious plan to cap a person’s negative 
gearing deductions at $20,000 a year, in a bid to spare “mum and dad property 
investors” from the impact.

Such a cap would affect about 10% of negatively geared investors and increase 
tax revenue by about $1bn a year, according tomodelling by the Australian 
National University associate professor Ben Phillips 
<http://rsss.anu.edu.au/sites/default/files/Distributional_Modelling%20_Negative_Gearing_and_Capital_Gains.pdf>
.

The same modelling paper showed Labor’s plan would increase taxation revenue 
in the long run between $3.4bn and $3.9bn a year.

“Our modelling shows that negative gearing benefits high income families with 
52.6% of the benefit going to the top 20% of incomes,” Phillips wrote. “Only 
5.2% of benefits go to the bottom 20% of incomes.”
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/07/Coalition_distances_itself_from_previous_bracket_creep_warnings.txt

The Turnbull government has backed away from previously dire warnings about 
the impact of bracket creep, the phenomenon pushing people into higher tax 
brackets as inflation lifts their wages.

The finance minister, Mathias Cormann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mathias-cormann>, said wage 
inflation was low so the problem was “not there to the same extent as it might 
have been in the past”, allowing the government to scale back its ambition for 
big income tax cuts.

Scott Morrison says Labor 'selling a unicorn' with negative gearing savings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/scott-morrison-says-labor-selling-a-unicorn-with-negative-gearing-savings>
The Coalition had been building the case for action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/24/joe-hockey-lays-ground-personal-income-tax-cuts-at-next-election>
 to tackle bracket creep for months, but now that it hasruled out an increase 
in the goods and services tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/16/turnbull-says-labors-negative-gearing-plan-harms-average-earners-as-gst-ruled-out>
 it is seeking todampen community expectations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/17/four-things-we-learnt-from-scott-morrisons-first-speech-to-the-national-press-club>
 about its forthcoming tax reform package.

Economic ministers have previously said the government must address bracket 
creep because it was a stealthy “inflation tax” that would detract from 
economic growth and workforce participation.

Cormann said on Thursday the government would do “as much as we can sensibly 
afford”, adding that the dumped option of raising the GST to fund income tax 
cuts would have allowed the government “to be a bit more ambitious”.


“Given that wage inflation is comparatively low, inflation generally is 
comparatively low, while the problem is there, it is not there to the same 
extent as it might have been in the past, as what it might have been if we 
weren’t in a changed environment,” Cormann told ABC Radio National.

“Our instinct is to deliver lower taxes to deliver personal income tax cuts to 
address bracket creep, but we will have to make judgments on what is 
affordable.”

Four things we learnt from Scott Morrison's first speech to the National Press 
Club | Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/17/four-things-we-learnt-from-scott-morrisons-first-speech-to-the-national-press-club>
Pressed on the Coalition’s previous warnings about bracket creep, Cormann 
reaffirmed the phenomenon was “a drag on growth” but low inflation rates gave 
the government “a little bit of room to recalibrate in a more affordable 
fashion our ambition in this area”.


Australian Bureau of Statistics figures show the wage price index 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/6345.0> rose by 2.3% overall in the 
year to the September 2015 quarter, while the 2.1% rate in the private sector 
wasthe lowest since the data series began 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/6345.0Media%20Release1Sep%202015?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=6345.0&issue=Sep%202015&num=&view=>
 in 1998. The consumer price index was running at 1.7% in the year to December.

Labor’s finance spokesman, Tony Burke, said the government was “directionless” 
and had no economic plan.

“This is a government that’s all at sea,” Burke said.

“Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison promised that there would be something 
different to Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey when they came in. The only difference 
is we have had no action, and more waffle.”

Record low wage growth is a blow to the government's case for tax reform | 
Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2015/nov/19/record-low-wage-growth-is-a-blow-to-the-governments-case-for-tax-reform>
Morrison, the treasurer, said in January he was passionate about addressing 
bracket creep as it was “one of the things that is holding theAustralian economy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/australia-economy> back”.

In November, Morrison described it as “a growing problem that impacts on 
workforce participation”. He said 300,000 Australians were expected to enter 
the second-highest tax bracket over the next two years, and a failure to cut 
income taxes would result in half of all taxpayers reaching the top two 
brackets in 10 years.

The assistant treasurer, Kelly O’Dwyer, also said it was unfair and “really 
shocking” that the average income earner would soon reach the second-highest 
tax bracket.

Hockey, the former treasurer, described bracket creep as a “stealth tax” that 
could detract from economic growth and lead to “negative financial and economic 
outcomes, for individuals and the nation”.

In May last year, Hockey said the phenomenon could cause “a downward spiral 
for the economy” and “untold problems in the future” unless it was properly 
addressed.

But in the past couple of weeks, the government has definitively killed off 
changes to the GST,citing modelling that showed such a move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/treasurys-gst-modelling-shows-rise-to-15-would-not-improve-growth>
 combined with income tax cuts and associated compensation payments would not 
generate much or any increase in economic growth.

Last week, the government also published a Treasury briefing paper showing the 
average personal income tax rate was forecast to rise from 24.4% in 2016-17 to 
26.6% in 2020-21.

Reducing the deficit by allowing an increase in the average tax rate could 
lead to a 0.35% contraction in gross domestic product in the long term, 
according to Treasury modelling. This impact is measured against a scenario 
whereby the government cut spending in order to a maintain constant average tax 
rate.

Addressing the National Press Club on Wednesday, Morrison said the 
government’s had “rescaled and rescoped” its options to address bracket creep 
after the decision not to increase the GST.

Treasury's GST modelling shows rise to 15% would not improve growth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/treasurys-gst-modelling-shows-rise-to-15-would-not-improve-growth>
The treasurer said the government had previously looked at “$30bn worth of 
income tax cuts [which] would have delivered one of the biggest changes to 
income tax rates and schedules that we’d seen in 30 years or more”.

“If you’re not dealing with that scope and scale, you’re obviously looking at 
far more modest measures,” he said.

Morrison added that he and the prime minister remained “deeply troubled” by 
the prospect of the average wage earner moving into the second-highest tax 
bracket.


“We may be able to prevent that outcome going forward,” he said, hinting at a 
potential tweak to the threshold in the forthcoming package.

During a post-speech media blitz on Thursday morning, Morrison defended the 
government’s handling of the tax debate andlikened Labor’s tax plans to “a 
unicorn” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/scott-morrison-says-labor-selling-a-unicorn-with-negative-gearing-savings>
.

The government has indicated it is looking at tax options including reining in 
the “excesses” of negative gearing, superannuation tax concessions and 
workplace tax deductions.

Morrison said that there was a “strong case” for reviewing superannuation 
concessions and that the government was close to a “landing point” on decisions 
on the details of the reforms, during a speech to the self-managed 
superannuation industry on Thursday evening.

He acknowledged that the concessions were used predominantly by high income 
earners.

“High income earners generally have more capacity and inclination to save for 
retirement. This is a good thing,” Morrison said. “It’s not something that 
should be demonised or seen as some sort of nefarious practice, which is often 
I think a point that is implied when people make criticisms of these things.”

“I think it’s great that people are out there saving for their future. I think 
it’s tremendous. They do it in superannuation and they do it in many other 
things, including amazingly, negative gearing, which I don’t think is a 
necessarily a bad thing that people would take those opportunities to provide 
for their future,” the treasurer said. “But I believe they raise questions 
about the purpose of the concessions particularly as it relates to 
superannuation.”

He ruled out making “effective retrospective” changes to super by taxing in 
the retirement phase.

“If they’re going to change the rules at the other end when you’re going to be 
living off it, then it’s understandable that people might get spooked.”
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/07/Double_dissolution_is_a__live_option__as_Morrison_rules_out__pixie_horse__tax__cuts.txt

The senior Turnbull government tactician Christopher Pyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christopher-pyne> has said a 
double-dissolution election remains “a live option”, as the Coalition struggles 
to defend its handling of tax reform.

A day after Scott Morrison was ridiculed for saying he would not sell the 
Australian people a unicorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/scott-morrison-says-labor-selling-a-unicorn-with-negative-gearing-savings>
, the treasurer revisited the fantasy theme as he declared he was determined to 
curb new spending and rein in the “excesses” of some tax concessions.

Scott Morrison says Labor 'selling a unicorn' with negative gearing savings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/scott-morrison-says-labor-selling-a-unicorn-with-negative-gearing-savings>
“I can sell them a fantasy or whatever you want to call it, pixie horses, 
whatever your preferred analogy is, but I’m not going to spin the public a line 
that there is some simple answer to getting expenditure down,” Morrison told 
3AW on Friday.

“It’s a long, hard, drilling through hardboards process.”

The government has now comprehensively ruled out increasing the goods and 
services tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/16/turnbull-says-labors-negative-gearing-plan-harms-average-earners-as-gst-ruled-out>
 and is seeking to lower expectations of wide-ranging tax reform, with the 
details due to be spelled out in the May budget.

Pyne, who is the industry minister and leader of the house, said the 
government would not rushed into making announcements on taxation just because 
of pressure from the media and commentators.

But he also noted the government retained the option of dissolving both houses 
of parliament and triggering an election based on the Coalition’s stalled 
workplace relations legislation.

“That is a live option; of course it is,” Pyne told the Nine Network’s Today 
program on Friday.

“There are not only issues around savings measures, there is also the 
Australian Building and Construction Commission. Labor doesn’t want to clean up 
construction and building in Australia, they want the CFMEU to continue to be a 
lawful organisation on building and construction sites. That’s bad for 
productivity.”

When asked about the remarks on Friday, the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, said a double 
dissolution was “available in circumstances where bills have been rejected 
within the appropriate time period ... but at the moment your question is a 
hypothetical one”.

Calling a double dissolution would be a high-stakes decision and the timetable 
is difficult.

The earliest date for a normal general election for the House of 
Representatives and half of the Senate is 6 August, but the constitution gives 
the government the option ofdissolving both houses to resolve legislative 
deadlocks 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/about_parliament/house_of_representatives/powers_practice_and_procedure/00_-_infosheets/infosheet_18_-_double_dissolution>
.

The attempt to create a registered organisations commission to crack down on 
unions already provides the government with a trigger, because the same bill 
has been rejected in two Senate votes held more than three months apart.

The government is also preparing to try again to get Senate support to 
reintroduce the Howard-era Australian Building and Construction Commission, 
which if blocked would create another trigger.

The ABC election analyst Antony Green has pointed out 
<http://blogs.abc.net.au/antonygreen/2016/02/prime-minister-says-double-dissolution-a-live-option.html>
 that the dissolution of both houses was not allowed in the last six months of 
a parliament, so the procedure would have to be invoked on or before 11 May – 
the day after the budget.

That could allow an election to be held in June or July, although Malcolm 
Turnbull would have to lock in an unusually long campaign with polling day on 
2, 9 or 16 July to avoid the risk ofprevent the Senate and House of 
Representatives terms from getting out of alignment 
<http://blogs.abc.net.au/antonygreen/2015/12/the-turnbull-governments-options-for-a-2016-election.html>
.

The government is working with the Greens and the independent senator Nick 
Xenophon onlegislation to change Senate voting rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/senate-voting-changes-coalition-wins-over-nick-xenophon-and-greens>
 to counter the rise of micro-parties, which, if passed, would increase the 
appeal of dissolving both houses.

The Labor leader, Bill Shorten, said his party was ready to fight an election, 
but called on the government to stop threatening to call a snap poll “to cover 
up their lack of action on the economy”.

Four things we learnt from Scott Morrison's first speech to the National Press 
Club | Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/17/four-things-we-learnt-from-scott-morrisons-first-speech-to-the-national-press-club>
“Labor’s not afraid of an election but the Liberals are afraid of the budget. 
They need to tell us what their economic plans are,” Shorten said.


“What do they stand for? They’re all waffle and no action.”

The Labor frontbencher, Anthony Albanese, said it was unclear why Turnbull had 
taken over from Tony Abbott “apart from getting the keys to the Lodge”.

“The whole of Australia was pleased when we got rid of Mr Angry and we got Mr 
Smiley, but now we know what we have got is Mr Waffle,” Albanese told the Nine 
Network.


Morrison, who used a National Press Club speech this week to signal that only 
“modest” income tax cuts would be possible, said the election would be held 
after the budget so people could have their say on the reform package.

Coalition distances itself from previous bracket creep warnings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/coalition-distances-itself-from-previous-bracket-creep-warnings>
The treasurer said addressing bracket creep – whereby people are pushed into 
higher tax brackets as inflation drives up wages – remained one of his key 
goals.

The finance minister, Mathias Cormann, also said he continued to believe 
bracket creep was a “drag on growth”, a day aftersuggesting it was not as big a 
problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/coalition-distances-itself-from-previous-bracket-creep-warnings>
 now that wage inflation was low.

Attempting to clean up his previous comments, Cormann told Sky News he had 
seen some “strange” interpretations of what he had said, and he wanted to make 
clear he was not playing down the importance of bracket creep.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/07/Why_the_super_rich_won_t_live_in_a_house_fit_for_a_king.txt

East Barsham Manor in Norfolk <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lmxobY7ghD4> 
doesn’t seem to be selling. Its owner has just dropped the asking price, 
newspapers reported last week, from £4m to just under £3m. That’s 25% off. It’s 
reduced to clear.

Let me start by saying that £3m is still a lot of money. Though not as much as 
when the manor was built in 1520. At that point, £3m would probably have bought 
you the entire country, which then came with a fair bit of Ireland too, as a 
sort of granny flat.

As a society, we’re more comfortable with our former masters, with ‘old money’

But I want to make sure I clearly say that, even these days, £3m really is a 
lot of money. I want to do so mainly in order not to be hated. If you start 
saying millions of pounds isn’t much money – even in contexts like “it isn’t 
much money to renew a nation’s nuclear deterrent” – you’re immediately basking 
in other people’s dislike. Just the phrase “not much” in close proximity to the 
word “million” raises the hackles of those for whom hackle-raising is a major 
form of exercise.

In fact, there’s really nothing to be gained from asserting that any sum isn’t 
“still a lot of money”. No one makes friends by denigrating any amount of money 
greater than a pound. And I reckon there’ll be those who’d seize on the 
slightest disregard for 90p. “It’s all very well for you, happily leaving 90p 
in coppers down the back of your sofa – 1.2 billion people live on less than 
that a day!” “Sorry, I just thought it was quite cheap for a tea.”

So I’m sincerely of the opinion that absolutely any quantity of money, no 
matter how small, is in fact a huge and ridiculous fortune. I totally don’t 
want you to go away with the idea that I’m one of those TV lefties, so 
massively enriched by institutions perversely constituted for the sole purpose 
of turning a blind eye to paedophilia that they think £3m is roughly what you 
tip a pizza delivery man. I don’t want anyone thinking that about me. Because 
that, my management team tells me, is no way to sell DVDs.

Nevertheless, in the context of Britain’s current absurd property market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/07/uk-house-prices-pick-up-pace-101-annual-increase-halifax-brexit>
, £3m doesn’t always buy you much: a flat in central London, a small house in 
not-quite-central London, a large house in outer London. It would certainly not 
purchase central London’s equivalent of East Barsham Manor, because that’s St 
James’s Palace.

But I’m being naive. It’s “location location location”, isn’t it? Rural 
Norfolk’s rubbish for the tube. The surprisingly large number of people 
fortunate enough to earn enough to raise a mortgage big enough to buy somewhere 
that costs £3m couldn’t still earn that in theNorfolk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/norfolk> countryside. They need to service 
those vast debts, and the immense political pressure keeping interest rates 
tiny is only half the battle. They’ve got to keep trousering the kind of salary 
you get by working in the City or practising law, rather than farming or 
running an antique shop.

What’s more, if you bought East Barsham Manor, you wouldn’t just have the 
mortgage to worry about. It’s a Grade I-listed 16th-century mansion set in 
ornamental gardens. It costs nearly two grand a week to stop it falling down. 
So it’s not a viable option for most of those who could just about afford the 
price tag.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fthe-rich-arent-manor-born-david-mitchell-east-barsham-manor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9219d6f3999ad5d71d55b30ad4a5ec85fa39a590%2F0_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20super-rich%20won%E2%80%99t%20live%20in%20a%20house%20fit%20for%20a%20king%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fthe-rich-arent-manor-born-david-mitchell-east-barsham-manor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20super-rich%20won%E2%80%99t%20live%20in%20a%20house%20fit%20for%20a%20king%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fthe-rich-arent-manor-born-david-mitchell-east-barsham-manor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9219d6f3999ad5d71d55b30ad4a5ec85fa39a590%2F0_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
In fact, the more I thought about it, the more it totally made sense that this 
unique jewel of Tudor architecture – where Henry VIII reputedly stayed onhis 
pilgrimage to Walsingham 
<http://www.walsinghamvillage.org/about/history-of-pilgrimage/>, with seven 
reception rooms, eight bedrooms, a great hall with minstrels’ gallery and five 
acres of grounds, on which there’s also a three-bedroom cottage – is roughly 
equated under our modern value system with a three-bedroom flat in a modern 
block in Pimlico.

Then suddenly it stopped making sense again. Hang on, I thought. High earners 
servicing seven-figure debts to sustain modest accommodation isn’t the main 
force inflating the property bubble. It’s the billionaires who have chosenLondon
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> as a place to shop, and its property 
market as a money laundry. They don’t have to worry about mortgages and the 
tube. They’re looking to buy palaces to hang out in for brief periods between 
superyacht rides. A Norfolk manor house would be fine for them – they could 
helicopter to Harrods in under an hour. The yacht could drop them off at King’s 
Lynn or Cromer.

But that lot don’t want houses like East Barsham Manor, I concluded bitterly. 
They want Belgravia town houses, stripped back, knocked through and ruined with 
onyx and granite and marble. They want screening rooms and gyms, they want 
cavernous dug-out basements for swimming pools and spa treatment suites and 
lightless bedrooms for servants. They want glass and steel and air-conditioning 
and panic rooms.

They don’t see the beauty and history, the irreplaceable preciousness of a 
building like East Barsham Manor, they’re just looking for a large dehumidified 
garage in which to keep their diamante-studded Humvees and leopard-print 
Bentleys. The comparatively modest price tag on this amazing Tudor mansion is, 
I realised, a direct consequence of the vulgarity of the rich – of the shocking 
fact that 99% of the world’s money is in the hands of people possessing 0.0001% 
of the world’s taste.

Commuters save £3,000 on property each minute further out of London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/03/commuters-save-3000-for-each-minute-travelled-out-of-london>
How odd that that bothers me so much, I reflected as I wrung the snobbish 
spittle out of my beard. It’s not the world’s growing inequalities of wealth 
that rile me, just that our new global economic overlords spend their 
ill-gotten gains so tackily – and that’s not a moral failing. Still, the 
feeling that these people are vulgar as well as rich makes them, to my British 
sensibilities, hugely more contemptible.

I think that feeling is pretty common (ironically). As a society, we’re more 
comfortable with our former masters, with “old money”. Few of us resent the 
fact that the dukes of Devonshire still live at Chatsworth – they’re just some 
nice old posh people. It doesn’t make us brim with rage, unlike an oligarch’s 
planning application to install a second car lift.

This imbalance of anger makes no logical sense. Whether it’s the old 
aristocracy or the new plutocracy, it’s still people who’ve ended up with 
unimaginable wealth for reasons that are seldom particularly fair. But the 
harsh edges of unfairness are softened by time; lichen tempers its frowning 
crenellations into a smile. After all, when Henry VIII stayed at East Barsham 
Manor, it was brand new — as gleaming and modern as an internet 
billionaire’s penthouse.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/08/Interview_with_a_Bookstore__Prairie_Lights__a_shop_fit_for_presidents.txt

Jim Harris had finished all of the work for a PhD in History and was stalled 
on his dissertation. He then started working in a bookstore and realized he 
would like to open one of his own. He got a small inheritance from his 
grandparents and moved back to Iowa City. In May 1978, he opened Prairie Lights.
Iowa <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/iowa> City has continued to be a good 
place for independent book selling!

What’s your favorite section of the store?

Jan Weissmiller (Co-owner): Poetry, of course.

Tim Budd (Bookseller): Fiction, hands down. I love a good story told well.

Kathleen Johnson (Events Coordinator): Fiction—I love to recommend books to 
people based on what they’ve loved.

If you had infinite space, what would you add?

Jan: It would be nice to have a permanent room that was designed and always 
ready for readings given that we have author events nearly every day. It would 
also be nice to have more community space for kids. I would love a place where 
they could do art projects, write and design things!

Terry (Sci-Fi Buyer and Operations Manager): More cowbell.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Jan: We have such a literary community in Iowa City. The combination of The 
Writers’ Workshop, The International Writing Program, The Non-Fiction Writing 
Program, and the activity that goes on around our designation as a UNESCO City 
of Literature (currently the only one in the US) means that there are always 
writers in the store. They are, of course, here to read, but they are also here 
casually to shop and talk all the time. This means that we have a very personal 
and stimulating environment and we can include all of our customers in 
wonderful spontaneous discussion of books much of the time. Sometimes it seems 
like we hardly have to work at creating this atmosphere—its just the luck of 
the location—but we are stimulated by it and I think we have learned naturally 
to facilitate a pretty high–or maybe invitingly whacky–level of discourse.

Who is your favorite regular?

There’s one customer whom I inadvertently startled once a few years ago who 
keeps trying to get me back

Jan: It’s hard for me to choose one. James Galvin, a member of the poetry 
faculty of The Iowa Writers’ Workshop, is a voracious reader of fiction as well 
as poetry. I really can’t keep up with him, but I love our discussions. I’m 
also incredibly fond of Burgess Kelly, one of the truly eccentric characters in 
Iowa City. He’s never been able to work, but he reads constantly and has been a 
customer since the store opened. We never know what he’ll say when he comes in.

Terry: There’s one customer whom I inadvertently startled once a few years ago 
who keeps trying to get me back.

Kathleen: Indiebob. He has a pet project of visiting all of the independent 
bookstores in Ron Rice’sMy Bookstore, and he has expanded beyond this and 
visits indie bookstores around the continental US and comes in and tells me 
about it. He is a retired junior high teacher and is also a musician, and he 
has an extremely good memory. He makes a point of talking to the staff at each 
store (and the owner if possible), and he mentions them by name and tells me 
what he bought based on their recommendations. He writes ablog 
<http://theindiebobspot.blogspot.com/>.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Tim: Craziest is perhaps not the best word to describe this, but certainly the 
most unique situation was President Obama’s visit to the store. The Secret 
Service closed off both ends of the street, no one could go in our out of the 
store (except employees arriving for work), and the sidewalks outside were 
crammed with folks hoping to see the President. He was in Iowa City making a 
speech at the university about the passage of the Health Care Act and had 
pointed out our store as an example of a local business that would benefit from 
the new legislation. We had the speech playing in the store; it was thrilling 
enough to hear Prairie Lights mentioned, but imagine our surprise when Obama 
walked in! He shook hands with every single employee and customer in the store 
at the time. I’ll remember it always.

Kathleen: It was crazy waiting on the President. I was at the cash register 
and had to ring up a book for Barack Obama. There were all kinds of cameras 
clicking away, both behind me at the register and all facing me, filling the 
store. It was otherwise quiet except for the cameras. I had no idea I would be 
doing that when I got up that morning. I would probably have washed my hair. I 
have an really anonymous name and had no internet presence prior to this, but 
then my picture was on the front of lots of newspapers and there I was on the 
White House website. I heard from lots of former classmates after that, through 
other friends. Thanks, Mr. President.

What’s your earliest memory of visiting a bookstore as a child?

Interview with a Bookstore: Melbourne's Readings, the best bookshop in the 
world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/02/interview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world>
Jan: There were no bookstores in my hometown. We went often to the spacious 
Carnegie Library. After I could read myself, I had a wonderful relationship 
with the librarian—Miss Fetteroff. I’m sure she’s the reason I’m both a reader 
and a bookseller today.


Terry: Buying Tolkien’s Silmarillion at a B. Dalton the day it came out.

Tim: As a child, I was a weekly visitor to the Mark Twain Room of the Council 
Bluffs Public Library, but once in high school, I was a frequent customer at 
the B. Dalton’s in the new downtown mall. I just found if fascinating to see 
what was new, and the large format coffee table books they had. My first 
purchase? An oversized book on hygiene and personal grooming for men—just what 
this young man desperately needed. I even tried to apply for work there, but 
employees had to be bonded and I was not yet 18.

If you weren’t working in a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Terry: Night watchman at a cranberry silo.

Tim: I’d probably still be in the restaurant business, either waiting tables 
or tending bar, bemoaning my existence and spending too much money on books.

Kathleen: Writing the books? Would rather sell the books. It’s easier, and the 
quality is better.

What’s been your biggest surprise about working in a bookstore?

Tim: I find the most surprising thing about working here is never knowing who 
will be stopping into the store on any given day. Authors, regular customers, 
former employees, even old friends and classmates from grad school always make 
a point of coming by if they’re in town. I came to work one day and saw Seamus 
Heaney sitting at a table signing copies of his book, as he was here talking at 
the university. Alison Bechdel stopped in after her keynote speech at a 
conference on graphic novels. I’ve met David Sedaris, Colm Toibin, Joseph 
Kanon, Jon Scalzi and Tony Kushner—all through the bookstore. It’s a wonderful 
gift!

The staff shelf

What are Prairie Lights’s booksellers reading?

 * Let Me Explain You by Annie Liontas (2015). Kathleen recommends: “Let Me 
Explain You is such an original and vividly told novel that I could hear the 
character’s voices and see their faces. Every time I opened the book, they 
sprang immediately to life, and author Anna Liontas plots this dysfunctional 
family tale in a way that is fresh and funny.”

 * A Few Seconds of Radiant Filmstrip by Kevin Brockmeier (2014). Paul 
recommends: “A tender, funny memoir of his year in seventh grade, by all odds 
the most horrifying time in a child’s life. Your body changes, your social 
world changes, what is expected of you changes, and notions of who you might 
become begin to suggest themselves to you. Kevin doesn’t understand that he is 
gay, although he suspects something is different in his personality. I am 
thankful to him for sharing humorously, and wisely this horrifying but 
important time in his life. It’s the best kid memoir I know.”

 * The Collected Stories of Deborah Eisenberg (2010). Mary recommends: “If you 
haven’t discovered Deborah Eisenberg’s beautifully crafted short stories, this 
is a good choice, because you will want to read and reread them all. These 
stories are rich and delicate, and linger in the memory to shift and amplify 
their values. Eisenberg’s subtle, intelligent observations put readers in the 
best company.”
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/08/Take_the_kids_to___Eden_Project__near_St_Austell__Cornwall.txt

In a nutshell
A vast, lush crater filled with two million plants, dominated by two shining 
biomes. The path leading to the entrance gives no clue as to the sight that 
awaits, then suddenly you are gazing at what looks like alien spaceships among 
acres of landscaped gardens. One biome houses the world’s largest indoor 
rainforest, the other 1,000 varieties of Mediterranean plants. Outside paths 
wind up and down terraces and past a giant bee and a 3.3 tonne Junkman 
sculpture. Sustainability is at its core, from various water and energy-saving 
devices to local and international community projects.

What’s new in your favourite UK holiday spots
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/08/new-attractions-food-uk-holiday-hotspots-family>
Fun fact
230 miles of scaffolding were used to build the biomes.

Best thing about it?
I can’t think of another UK attraction that matches it for visual wow factor. 
In the school holidays there are free themed shows and activities, with an 
educational bent – but always fun and interactive. My five-year old had great 
fun in a messy slime-making session during a half-term science week.Dinosaur 
Uproar <http://www.edenproject.com/visit/whats-on/dinosaur-uproar> is this 
summer’s attraction (until 2 September) with animatronic dinosaurs roaming the 
grounds, a dig pit for mini palaeontologists and activity sessions throughout 
the day. In September (10-27) celebrity chefs – and former the Great British 
Bake Off contestants – will be giving demonstrations as part of the Festival of 
Food.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F18%2Fthe-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439898084999%2F590a8f13-569e-4a90-81f5-99ab27fbaaa0-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Take%20the%20kids%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Eden%20Project%2C%20near%20St%20Austell%2C%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F18%2Fthe-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Take%20the%20kids%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Eden%20Project%2C%20near%20St%20Austell%2C%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F18%2Fthe-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439898084999%2F590a8f13-569e-4a90-81f5-99ab27fbaaa0-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Eden Project’s summer attraction, Dinosaur Uproar. Photograph: Steve Tanner
What about lunch?
There’s no shortage of places to eat, and there’s an emphasis on healthy food 
– no fizzy drink dispensers here. The Med Terrace in the Mediterranean biome is 
a pleasant spot for a sit-down lunch with pizzas from £8.50 (kids £5.50), 
paella £9.95, seabass £9. At the Eden Kitchen one main item (say, roast salmon 
or chicken wrapped in prosciutto) with salad costs £7.95; for kids the “grab a 
bag” (wraps, hummus, juice or water, fruit) costs £5.95; a juice bar sells 
mixes from £3.50. Ice-creams come in exotic flavours (mango yogurt, coconut and 
baobab, coffee and brazil nut) for £2 a scoop.

Exit through the gift shop?
The shop is vast, selling gifts, clothes, cards, local beer, wine, food, 
books, gardening paraphernalia and more. But you can scoot around the side of 
it to avoid temptation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F18%2Fthe-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439898302412%2F3a5c5a13-ca3f-49e0-b9e8-dfcdb21dd214-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Take%20the%20kids%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Eden%20Project%2C%20near%20St%20Austell%2C%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F18%2Fthe-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Take%20the%20kids%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Eden%20Project%2C%20near%20St%20Austell%2C%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F18%2Fthe-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439898302412%2F3a5c5a13-ca3f-49e0-b9e8-dfcdb21dd214-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Exploring the botanical gardens. Photograph: Guido Cozzi/Atlantide 
Phototravel/Corbis 
Getting there
Drivers park for free and there are electric car-charge points. The nearest 
train station is St Austell, then First Bus 101. Visitors arriving by foot, 
bike or public transport get a discount.

Top 10 budget restaurants and cafes in Newquay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/02/top-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newquay-cornwall>
Opening times
9.30am-6pm (8pm some dates in August). In the school summer holidays get there 
when it opens or face long queues.

Value for money?
It’s not a cheap day out but it is a very special place. Advance tickets (they 
are 10% more on the door): adults £22.50, kids (5-15) £12.50, family of four 
£62.50. Tickets to theHangloose <http://hanglooseadventure.com/> thrill rides 
(the Drop, where you jump onto an airbag, England’s longest zip-wire at 660 
metres, and a giant swing) ramp up costs considerably (combined ticket for all 
three £34, bought separately at the Hangloose kiosk). The new onsitehostel 
<http://www.yha.org.uk/hostel/eden-project>, a collaboration between YHA and 
Snoozebox, costs £55 a night (for a family of four). Guests who buy Eden 
Project tickets directly through YHA get 20% off the entry price and unlimited 
access for the duration of their stay.

Verdict
9/10

• edenproject.com <https://www.edenproject.com/> 
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/08/Translation_Tuesday__About_My_Mother_by_Tahar_Ben_Jelloun___extract.txt

Since she’s been ill, my mother’s become a frail little thing with a faltering 
memory. She summons members of her family who are long dead. She talks to them, 
is astonished that her mother hasn’t come to visit, and sings the praises of 
her little brother who, she says, always brings her presents. They file past 
her bedside, sometimes they linger. I don’t interrupt them, I don’t like to 
upset her. Keltum, her paid companion, complains: ‘She thinks we’re in Fez, the 
year you were born!’


Mother’s revisiting my childhood. Her memory’s been toppled, lies scattered 
over the damp floor. Time and reality are out of kilter. She gets swept away by 
the emotions that come surging back. Every quarter of an hour, she asks me: 
‘How many children do you have?’ Every time, I answer in the same even tone. 
Keltum is agitated and interrupts to say she can’t stand Mother’s repeated 
questions any more.

Her memory’s been toppled, lies scattered over the damp floor. Time and 
reality are out of kilter

Mother’s afraid of Keltum. She’s a woman whose eyes betray her wicked thoughts 
and she knows it. When she speaks to me, she looks at the floor. When she 
greets me, she’s obsequious, bowing and attempting to kiss my hand. I don’t 
want to push her away, or put her in her place. I pretend not to know what 
she’s up to. I can see fear in my mother’s eyes. Fear that Keltum might leave 
her on her own when none of us are here. Fear that she won’t give her her 
medication. Fear that she’ll let her go without food, or worse, give her meat 
that’s gone off. Fear that she might spank her, as if she were a naughty child. 
In one of her lucid moments, my mother said to me: ‘I’m not mad, you know. 
Keltum thinks I’m a little girl again. She tells me off, she threatens me, but 
I know it’s the pills playing tricks on me. Keltum’s not a bad person, she’s 
just prickly. She’s tired. She’s the one who washes me every morning, you know, 
son; she’s the one who cleans up the stuff that leaks out of me. I couldn’t ask 
that of you, or your brother, so Keltum’s here for that too. It’s as well to 
forget the rest …’

How can I forget that my mother’s in the care of a woman who, over the years, 
has become hard, cynical and grasping? Why is my mother journeying back to 
childhood under the malevolent gaze of this bully?

Mother started talking about the midwife, Lalla Radhia, again. She insisted I 
invite her to lunch and told me where to go: ‘She lives just before Batha, the 
big square at the entrance to the medina. Go to the café run by Sallam, 
Khaduj’s husband – you know, Uncle Moulay Ali’s daughter-in-law. Go into the 
café and ask for her. Everyone knows her, she has to come!’ I try to remind her 
that Lalla Radhia’s no longer with us, but she insists she wants her at the 
house for lunch.

Since Mother’s moved into a different bedroom, she’s convinced she’s in a 
different house and is living in a different city. We’re no longer in Impasse 
Ali Bey in Tangier, but the Makhfiya district in Fez. We’re no longer in the 
year 2000, but 1944. Her dreams won’t be extinguished. They assail her waking 
hours, refuse to leave her alone. The present is lurching. It flickers, 
sputters back to life and then fades altogether. It no longer concerns her. 
She’s become detached from it, which doesn’t worry her in the least.

She tells me she saw a man and a woman talking in the hallway. They must have 
come to buy the old house in Fez. She warns me not to let it go cheaply: ‘Times 
are hard. The war’s not over and besides, your father won’t be happy! I heard 
the man say to the woman, “It’s a bargain, we should seize the opportunity.” 
Anyone would think they lived with us and knew we were struggling. The man’s 
not from Fez, he has a country accent − Fassi’s more refined. And in any case, 
we’re not selling!’

Today, Zineb, her nurse, has come to change her dressings. No longer able to 
recognise her, Mother refuses to let her touch her foot. Zineb says she won’t 
hurt her. Mother smiles: ‘If you do, my father will know all about it. I’m not 
a child, so go on, clean the wound and don’t treat me like a frightened little 
girl.’ Then things fall back into place and she remembers everything. It was 
just a lapse. A memory lapse. Her recollections are a little hazy.

Mother threw a pretty gold chain down the toilet. Keltum fished it out and 
washed it repeatedly for two days, then soaked it in adulterated eau de cologne.

My sister has come from Fez to look after her. Mother’s annoyed: she thinks 
she’s her own mother. My sister’s getting on a bit too, she’s only sixteen 
years younger than my mother, the daughter of her first marriage. Mother 
remembers very clearly: ‘I’d just turned fifteen. My husband was strong and 
handsome. The typhus epidemic carried him off before my daughter was born. A 
widow at sixteen!’

*

My mother’s body continues to shrink. She is tiny. A tiny, light little thing 
with meagre flesh that causes her pain. Her sight has deteriorated but her 
hearing is perfect. She detected the call to prayer in the chirping of a 
sparrow. She said: ‘It’s calling God.’ My sister didn’t contradict her; she 
agreed the bird was an angel come to pray with them.

Once again she confused me with my older brother, asking me how his children 
were, getting everything muddled. Then she thought my children were my 
brother’s. I prefer to see the funny side, but he gets upset and his eyes fill 
with tears. I feel like crying too, but resist, because at times she is 
perfectly lucid and I see her as she always was – beautiful and graceful, 
clever and astute, conscious of what she’s suffering and of everything going on 
around her. She never loses her mind completely. My brother took it upon 
himself to work out how long her moments of clarity last compared with her 
rambling. He claims the periods when her mind wanders last longer.

Yesterday, sounding embarrassed, Keltum asked me to buy some pads. Mother’s 
increasingly incontinent, but she refuses to wear them. She tears off the 
adhesive strips and flings the pads under the bed. Keltum’s furious. She can’t 
take it any more: ‘You’re only here a few hours, but for me it’s all the time, 
day and night – and it’s worse at night. She hardly sleeps and wakes us up to 
talk about Fez and her brothers, who died a long time ago. Tell the doctor to 
give her a pill that will give her back her mind, or make her sleep. I can’t 
stand this any longer!’

Mother’s always had a serene attitude towards death. Her faith in God has 
driven out any fear of it. Once, in the days when her health gave no cause for 
alarm, she asked me for a large sum of money. ‘Why? Don’t be like your father, 
always asking what I wanted money for. I’m going to redo the sitting room, buy 
some new fabric, repaint the entire house, get two lovely low tables and some 
more cutlery and napkins.’ And why all that? ‘I want the house to be clean and 
tidy for my funeral. People will come from all over the country: I want them to 
find the house looking nice. They must be served good food; I’ve always 
received my guests generously. My farewell should be lavish, the best reception 
of all! That’s why I need money, son. I’m telling you now, and don’t forget. It 
has to be a grand occasion.’

Translation Tuesday: Miss Keaton and Other Beasts by Teresa Colom – extract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/translation-tuesdays-by-asymptote-journal/2016/may/31/translation-tuesday-miss-keaton-and-other-beasts-by-teresa-colom-extract>
My friend Roland’s mother celebrated her ninetieth birthday by going round the 
world. She lives in Lausanne, and her health is good, she plays bridge every 
day, reads books and goes to the cinema. Life in Switzerland is less tiring 
than it is in Fez. My mother never went to school, she doesn’t know how to play 
bridge, has never been to the theatre or the opera. She’s had three husbands 
and given birth to four children, fed them and raised them. Three husbands and 
only one true love. I’ve never heard her tell the story – I guessed. My mother 
doesn’t talk about love. It’s a word she uses only for her children. She says: 
‘I’d die for you, light of my eyes, rainbow of my life, I’d die for you!’ She’s 
uneducated but not uncultured, she has her own culture, religious beliefs, 
values and traditions. To live an entire life without ever deciphering a page 
of writing, without ever being able to read numbers, to live in a closed world 
surrounded by signs, unable to understand them… The problem became acute the 
day my father had the telephone installed: she felt the need to learn numbers 
so she could call her children, her sister and her husband. My father taught 
them to her but soon lost patience, leaving her with the numbers written large 
on a slate. She decided to learn two phone numbers, no more: mine and the one 
for my father’s shop. She spent all day dialling them until she’d learned them 
by heart. One day she managed to dial mine correctly but to her disappointment 
she got the answerphone. She spoke to it: ‘You, machine, you’re the machine of 
my son in lafrance, aren’t you? Now you listen to me, and whatever you do, make 
sure you don’t forget a word I say, so you can tell him when he gets back. Now 
you tell him that his mother called, she’s fine – well, more or less, she’s 
dying to see him. Tell him too that his father’s coughing a lot and won’t go to 
the doctor. You must make a point of that, so he’ll call his doctor friend and 
get him to come over. He’s coughing up and spitting out nasty stuff. Tell him 
too that his sister Touria has gone to Mecca. So that’s it, machine, don’t 
forget to tell him to speak to his father, tell him as well that my blood 
sugar’s up after Keltum upset me. Right, I’m putting the phone down and I’m 
counting on you to pass on the message. One more thing – I’ll be quick – tell 
him that El Haj, his cousin, has lost his wife and he should call to offer his 
condolences. Thank you, thank you very much!’

Translated from the French by Ros Schwartz and Lulu Norman

About My Mother <http://www.saqibooks.co.uk/book/mother/> will be released in 
bookstores later this month.

*****

 * Born in Fez, Morocco, Tahar Ben Jelloun is an award-winning and 
internationally bestselling novelist, essayist, critic and poet. Regularly 
shortlisted for the Nobel Prize in Literature, he has won the Prix Goncourt and 
the International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award. His work has also been 
shortlisted for the Independent Foreign Fiction Prize. He received the rank of 
Officier de la Légion d’honneur in 2008. Some of his works in English 
translation include The Happy Marriage, This Blinding Absence of Light, The 
Sand Child and Racism Explained to My Daughter. 
 * Ros Schwartz has translated a wide range of Francophone fiction and 
non-fiction writers including Andrée Chedid, Aziz Chouaki, Fatou Diome, 
Dominique Manotti and Dominique Eddé. She was made Chevalier dans l’Ordre des 
Arts et des Lettres for her services to literature in 2009. 
 * Lulu Norman has translated the work of Mahi Binebine, Albert Cossery, 
Mahmoud Darwish, Amin Maalouf and the songs of Serge Gainsbourg. Her 
translations have been shortlisted for the International IMPAC Dublin Literary 
Award, Independent Foreign Fiction Prize and Best Translated Books Award, among 
others.  --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/16/Barbies__chocolate__scotch__give_your_godchildren_what_they_don_t_get_at_home.txt

It’s a great, although slightly strange, honour to be asked to be a godparent. 
What’s it all about? What does it mean? What should you do? I was recently 
asked to be godmother for what will be my fourth godchild. But even with four, 
I am still unsure about the role modern godparents play.

Am I to take them to church and provide spiritual guidance? Do I bring them up 
if their parents are killed in a plane crash? Do I send them a card and lavish 
presents for their birthdays?

Brigid Delaney's diary | Defy the 'wellness' industry: here are some simple 
ways to feel better in 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/defy-the-wellness-industry-heres-some-free-ways-to-feel-better-in-2017-brigid-delaney>
In the film version of About a Boy, a lazy bachelor played by Hugh Grant was 
asked to become a godparent and declined by saying, “I couldn’t possibly think 
of a worse godfather … I’ll forget her birthdays until her 18th, when I’ll take 
her out and get her drunk and … try and shag her.”

Apart from NOT doing that, are there any rules for godparenting? What is the 
test for being a good godparent?

I think you should be a ballast – give them what they are lacking at home. Say 
your godchild has fierce helicopter parents who buy them politically correct 
toys and don’t let them eat lollies – it is your duty to provide some balance, 
and chocolate.

Consider presents including Barbie dolls for children of feminists, and 
violent video games, knives that look real and complicated plastic machine guns 
for the children of pacifists.

When they’re teenagers, buy them bottles of scotch and tickets to music 
festivals, trips to a capital-city strip club and clothes they want but their 
parents think are inappropriate.

Godparents can be the bridge kids need between their childish selves and the 
adults they are becoming

If they are the child of wild, out-of-control party parents, this is when you 
should offer to accompany your godchild to weekly religious services or 
volunteer together at soup kitchens.

As long as you don’t forget their birthday and send them a card with money in 
it each year, their childhood is pretty well sorted. Older kids, however, will 
often feel safer trying on a more adult role – having a stab at being more 
sophisticated, expressing fledging opinions – with someone close to their 
parents but not their parents.

Godparents can be the bridge kids need between their childish selves and the 
adults they are becoming. Let them walk across you. Take them out to a nice 
restaurant, talk to them as though they’re adults, draw out their opinions, let 
them feel comfortable and trust you. Keep the relationship with the godchild 
open, even if the one with their parents breaks down.

There are plenty of examples of that. Does Tony Blair’s birthday card with a 
tenner in it get returned to sender, after he posts it to godchild Grace Deng, 
for example? After all,Rupert Murdoch was apparently hurt by the closeness  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/13/rupert-murdoch-hurt-by-closeness-of-wendi-deng-and-tony-blair-editor-reveals>
of his ex-wife Wendi Deng to Blair, according to Chris Mitchell, the former 
editor-in-chief of the Murdoch-owned broadsheet, the Australian. And what of 
Mitchell, who said of Kevin Rudd:

I think my worst mistake was to persuade Rupert Murdoch – and it really was me 
persuading him – that we should back Kevin Rudd in 2007. I should have known 
that Kevin could not change his spots.

I think I alienated a lot of my readers with that decision and pretty quickly 
Kevin showed that he was just as difficult as he had ­always been.

Fair enough, Mitchell doesn’t like Rudd. Yet Rudd is the godfather of 
Mitchell’s son, Riley. Awk!

But just because your relationship with the parents may break down it doesn’t 
mean the relationship with the child should crumble. Leave the door open for 
future contact and you may end up having a great relationship with your 
godchild without their parents’ involvement. Although it will probably 
infuriate the parents.

It’s also an idea to clarify your role. If the parents die, would they expect 
you to adopt their children? Are you expected to provide religious guidance? 
Babysitting? Friendship? Does the relationship have an expiry date, for example 
when the child turns 18? Is the godparent primarily there for emotional support 
or for practical assistance?

Am I a bad mother? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Rowan Davies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/am-i-a-bad-mother-you-asked-google-heres-the-answer>
Friends of my parents who assumed godparent-like roles in my life when I was 
becoming an adult helped me in some of the following ways:

 *  Gave me a bed in their house for two weeks when I was at college and 
hating it. 
 * Nursed me and drove me to doctors’ appointments when, during a university 
booze cruise, someone put out their smouldering cigarette butt in my eye which 
blinded me for several weeks, and I had to wear a patch. 
 * Visited me when I was living overseas and took me to great restaurants I 
couldn’t then afford. 
 * Debated politics with me in a way that sharpened my opinions. 
 * Went to every book launch or event I have held, buying multiple copies of 
whatever I was selling. 
 * Helped me move house. 
 * Helped me clean houses to get the bond back. 
 This week I attended the funeral of one of these spectacular godparent-like 
figures who had been in my life since I was a child. A close friend of my 
parents, Tom enriched my life in so many ways – including doing many of things 
for me that I’ve listed above. I consider myself supremely lucky to have known 
him. And maybe that is the test of a good godparent. After all, you’ve got to 
pass it on.

A spur-of-the-moment sticking point

There’s a lot about the Sussan Ley travel expenses story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-secured-property-finance-months-before-apartment-purchase>
 that stinks, but what sticks in my craw is her statement that the $795,000 
purchase of the Gold Coast apartment was a spontaneous decision. Like buying a 
dress! Or a bag of chips!

Sussan Ley may lose her job over expenses. She should lose it over health 
policy | Michael Buckley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/sussan-ley-may-lose-her-job-over-expenses-she-should-lose-it-over-health-policy>
 The cost of housing – particularly in Melbourne and Sydney – has meant that 
many people on average wages will either have to move away or rent forever. 
They salt away what they can for a deposit, they despair of ever being able to 
afford anything close to their workplace or family, they spend every Saturday 
for years attending auctions where property regularly sells for $100,000 more 
than they can afford. A lack of spontaneity – and lack of opportunity – 
characterise many people’s experience of the housing market.

So when a politician describes buying her second property as a spontaneous 
decision (her partner also owns a couple of investment properties, as well as a 
bin-cleaning franchise) it betrays one of the worst things a politician can be: 
out of touch.

That alone should cause Malcolm Turnbull to shiver – and make her position on 
the frontbench untenable.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/16/Carney_tells_MPs_Brexit_no_longer_biggest_risk_to_stability__WEF_warns_on__inequality___as_it_happened.txt

1.07pm EST 13:07  <> 

And finally, the chair of the Treasury select committee Andrew Tyrie has 
commented on the session with Bank of England governor Mark Carney. He said:

The Governor has given strong advice today, both to the UK Government and to 
the governments of the rest of the EU. He’s told the Government that it is 
“highly advisable” to seek agreement to transitional arrangements, and at the 
start of the negotiations.

And he’s also told the UK’s negotiating counterparts in the EU that they, more 
than the UK, are vulnerable to financial stability risks during the period of 
transition. I hope they are all listening.

On that note, it’s time to close for the evening. Thanks for all your comments 
and we’ll be back tomorrow.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f%23block-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f%23block-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f%23block-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f%23block-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f%23block-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f%23block-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.04pm EST 13:04  <> 

European markets end higher

In Europe the mood was also fairly buoyant while in the US, the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average ricocheted between positive and negative and positive again 
as president elect Donald Trump gave his press conference. The final scores in 
Europe showed:

 * Germany’s Dax rose 0.54% to 11,646.17 
 * France’s Cac climbed 0.01% to 4888.71 
 * Italy’s FTSE MIB added 0.32% to 19,486.88 
 * But Spain’s Ibex ended down 0.46% at 9408.6 
Meanwhile the Dow Jones Industrial Average is currently up 19 points at 19,874 
having been as high as 19,973 and as low as 19,833 during the day so far.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c%23block-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c%23block-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c%23block-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c%23block-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c%23block-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c%23block-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.36pm EST 12:36  <> 

FTSE 100 hits three records

While Carney was speaking, the FTSE 100 ran up three new records, as 
continuing weakness in the pound - it hit a near 32 year low against the dollar 
excluding last year’s flash crash- continued to drive overseas earners higher.

The index smashed through the 7300 level although it later slipped back as the 
pound came off its worst levels, ending up 15.02 at 7290.49.

That marked a new peak, the tenth day of record closes and the 12th day of 
rises. All three never seen before. Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at Hargreaves 
Lansdown, said:

The Footsie has now seen a dozen days of price increases, in what amounts to 
its longest winning streak ever. It won’t go on forever, but the winter rally 
has shown it has considerable legs.

It’s not just the miners and international companies benefiting from lower 
sterling which are sustaining the rally, some domestically-focussed stocks are 
also chipping in, which suggests some optimism towards the prospects for UK 
companies is driving the market upward too.

Updated at 1.18pm EST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd%23block-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd%23block-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd%23block-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd%23block-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd%23block-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd%23block-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.21pm EST 12:21  <> 

Mark Carney at the Treasury select committee

In a two and a half hour session, Bank of England chair Mark Carney and 
members of its financial policy committee were quizzed on Brexit, forecasting 
and stress tests.

Carney said Brexit was no longer the most significant domestic risk to 
financial stablity. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587640e2e4b0710de27b870d#block-587640e2e4b0710de27b870d>
 But he maintained thatthe Bank’s actions had mitigated the risks around the 
referendum vote. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58763e63e4b0f10ba20b7069#block-58763e63e4b0f10ba20b7069>

On the Brexit discussions, Carney said the consequences of not having a 
transitional deal would be higher for the EU than for the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587641cae4b0710de27b8711#block-587641cae4b0710de27b8711>
.

On the subject of the Bank getting its forecasts wrong ahead of the vote, FPC 
member Martin Taylor said thatjust because there had not been a problem yet, 
that meant there would not be problems. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587646dfe4b0f10ba20b7080#block-587646dfe4b0f10ba20b7080>

Carney says forecasting has improved because they look at what could go wrong 
rather than thinking everything was going right. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587648e2e4b0710de27b872d#block-587648e2e4b0710de27b872d>
 He repeats thatthe Bank’s actions and preparations helped mitigate some of the 
risks following the vote. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-5876499ee4b0c0afac91fad9#block-5876499ee4b0c0afac91fad9>

Martin Taylor said he was surprised at the strength of the economy since the 
Brexit vote, but it was becauseforecasters overestimated the negative effect of 
the referendum on consumer confidence. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58764af4e4b0710de27b8737#block-58764af4e4b0710de27b8737>

Speaking of forecasts, Carney suggested the Bank was likely to lift its UK 
growth forecasts in February. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58764a62e4b0710de27b8731#block-58764a62e4b0710de27b8731>

Anil Kashyap of the FPC reckons the risk to financial stability has not yet 
increased because of the election of Donald Trump, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9#block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9>
 but the Bank admitted it was monitoring the president elect’s Twitter account 
given his potential for market moving comments.

The Bank members also spent some time defending the latest bank stress tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760#block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760>
, notably to suggestions they were not rigorous enough.

And there were also concerns about the high levels of consumer credit. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41#block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df%23block-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df%23block-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df%23block-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df%23block-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df%23block-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df%23block-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.51am EST 11:51  <> 

And after some discussion about the buy to let market, the session ends. Chair 
Andrew Tyrie says that “ as usual when we start talking about financial 
stability we end with the housing market”, and thanks them for coming.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d%23block-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d%23block-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d%23block-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d%23block-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d%23block-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d%23block-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.38am EST 11:38  <> 

Is housing market sustainable, with prices relative to income back to levels 
seen in 2008?

Alex Brazier: That rise in level in house prices relative to income has not, 
as it did in 2008, meant a rise in household debt. It’s not house prices per 
se, it’s the level of household debt, and [that] shows a completely different 
picture.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a%23block-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a%23block-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a%23block-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a%23block-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a%23block-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a%23block-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.22am EST 11:22  <> 

Question on the 10.8% growth in consumer credit last year. Is the Bank too 
relaxed or complacent about this?

FPC executive director Alex Brazier says he’s not relaxed: Consumer credit 
growth is difficult to ignore. What are the risks to financial stability? We 
have been discussing the loosening of credit conditions, such as a doubling of 
interest rate free periods for credit cards. We need to be alert and vigilant.

It has been a driver of consumer spending, so it’s important how we should 
address it, as it has a broader economic resilience.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41%23block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41%23block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41%23block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41%23block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41%23block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41%23block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.03am EST 11:03  <> 

Carney and his committee defend the results of the tests, but says he welcomes 
analysis and discussion ( such as by the head of an independent review of banks 
Sir John Vickers, who said the stress tests were not rigorous enough.)

An ITV report 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2017-01-10/sir-john-vickers-bank-of-england-stress-tests-not-tough-enough/>
 said using more rigorous tests would have meant only Lloyds passed, but Carney 
and co said they could not see how this result was achieved and seemed 
satisfied with the outcome of their own tests.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15%23block-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15%23block-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15%23block-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15%23block-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15%23block-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15%23block-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.50am EST 10:50  <> 

Anil Kashyap says he expects it will become exceptional for UK banks to fail 
the stress test in future.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad%23block-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad%23block-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad%23block-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad%23block-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad%23block-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad%23block-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.49am EST 10:49  <> 

Question on bank stress tests, when RBS failed in November: Should we expect 
every year to see at least one bank fail so we can’t say they are not difficult 
enough.

Martin Taylor: People say that anyway. We don’t consider that. We try to set 
stress which is severe and plausible and put the system through the wringer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876534de4b0710de27b8760%23block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876534de4b0710de27b8760%23block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876534de4b0710de27b8760%23block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876534de4b0710de27b8760%23block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876534de4b0710de27b8760%23block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876534de4b0710de27b8760%23block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.43am EST 10:43  <> 

Pound hits new 31 year low against the dollar

Meanwhile the pound has hit a new 31 year low against the dollar - excluding 
the flash crash - with the US currency boosted ahead of Donald Trump’s press 
conference on hopes of details of his plans for the country’s economy.Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sterling> has fallen as low as $1.2039 
and is now down 1% at $1.2056. Neil Wilson, senior market analyst at ETX 
Capital, said:

The move looks dollar driven with the buck heavy bid at day highs across the 
board ahead of Donald Trump’s news conference.

It’s now looking very precarious indeed for sterling and we could see it drop 
further as stops are triggered. Cable is down another 1% today and is flirting 
with flash crash lows and could spark more selling.

The correlation between the pound and the FTSE is obvious. The sharp move 
south at 15:18 saw sterling dip half a cent against the dollar in just a minute 
and we witnessed a corresponding move in the FTSE 100 at the exact same time, 
with the index jumping 10 points in 60 seconds. At pixel time it was rocking 
new highs at 7,321, on course for yet another record close.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8%23block-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8%23block-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8%23block-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8%23block-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8%23block-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8%23block-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.28am EST 10:28  <> 

We monitor Trump's Twitter account

Question: Do you monitor Trump’s Twitter account in case he says something,.

Carney: Yes. We monitor your Twitter account, chairman. So yes we follow it.

We look forward to working with the new US members.

Updated at 10.28am EST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751%23block-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751%23block-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751%23block-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751%23block-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751%23block-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751%23block-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.26am EST 10:26  <> 

Risks have stayed the same so far after Trump - Bank

Tyrie: is Trump a risk to financial stability?

Anil Kashyap: The committee hasn’t discussed this but personally, the first 
thing will be Trump filling the vice chair position at Federal Reserve. That 
could change the way the Fed negotiates over financial stability issues.

It still takes 60 votes in Senate to do many things, anything attached to tax 
and spending review you need 50. Anything to do with rolling back Dodd Franks, 
they can’t do that will just 50 votes.

He can do personal changes immediately.

Tyrie: so has risk up or stayed the same?

The same, the number of things the US can do unilaterally that he can trigger 
is limited in the short term.

Updated at 10.29am EST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9%23block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9%23block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9%23block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9%23block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9%23block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9%23block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
And finally, the chair of the Treasury select committee Andrew Tyrie has 
commented on the session with Bank of England governor Mark Carney. He said:

The Governor has given strong advice today, both to the UK Government and to 
the governments of the rest of the EU. He’s told the Government that it is 
“highly advisable” to seek agreement to transitional arrangements, and at the 
start of the negotiations.

And he’s also told the UK’s negotiating counterparts in the EU that they, more 
than the UK, are vulnerable to financial stability risks during the period of 
transition. I hope they are all listening.

On that note, it’s time to close for the evening. Thanks for all your comments 
and we’ll be back tomorrow.
 
In Europe the mood was also fairly buoyant while in the US, the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average ricocheted between positive and negative and positive again 
as president elect Donald Trump gave his press conference. The final scores in 
Europe showed:

 * Germany’s Dax rose 0.54% to 11,646.17 
 * France’s Cac climbed 0.01% to 4888.71 
 * Italy’s FTSE MIB added 0.32% to 19,486.88 
 * But Spain’s Ibex ended down 0.46% at 9408.6 
Meanwhile the Dow Jones Industrial Average is currently up 19 points at 19,874 
having been as high as 19,973 and as low as 19,833 during the day so far.
 
While Carney was speaking, the FTSE 100 ran up three new records, as 
continuing weakness in the pound - it hit a near 32 year low against the dollar 
excluding last year’s flash crash- continued to drive overseas earners higher.

The index smashed through the 7300 level although it later slipped back as the 
pound came off its worst levels, ending up 15.02 at 7290.49.

That marked a new peak, the tenth day of record closes and the 12th day of 
rises. All three never seen before. Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at Hargreaves 
Lansdown, said:

The Footsie has now seen a dozen days of price increases, in what amounts to 
its longest winning streak ever. It won’t go on forever, but the winter rally 
has shown it has considerable legs.

It’s not just the miners and international companies benefiting from lower 
sterling which are sustaining the rally, some domestically-focussed stocks are 
also chipping in, which suggests some optimism towards the prospects for UK 
companies is driving the market upward too.
 
In a two and a half hour session, Bank of England chair Mark Carney and 
members of its financial policy committee were quizzed on Brexit, forecasting 
and stress tests.

Carney said Brexit was no longer the most significant domestic risk to 
financial stablity. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587640e2e4b0710de27b870d#block-587640e2e4b0710de27b870d>
 But he maintained thatthe Bank’s actions had mitigated the risks around the 
referendum vote. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58763e63e4b0f10ba20b7069#block-58763e63e4b0f10ba20b7069>

On the Brexit discussions, Carney said the consequences of not having a 
transitional deal would be higher for the EU than for the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587641cae4b0710de27b8711#block-587641cae4b0710de27b8711>
.

On the subject of the Bank getting its forecasts wrong ahead of the vote, FPC 
member Martin Taylor said thatjust because there had not been a problem yet, 
that meant there would not be problems. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587646dfe4b0f10ba20b7080#block-587646dfe4b0f10ba20b7080>

Carney says forecasting has improved because they look at what could go wrong 
rather than thinking everything was going right. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587648e2e4b0710de27b872d#block-587648e2e4b0710de27b872d>
 He repeats thatthe Bank’s actions and preparations helped mitigate some of the 
risks following the vote. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-5876499ee4b0c0afac91fad9#block-5876499ee4b0c0afac91fad9>

Martin Taylor said he was surprised at the strength of the economy since the 
Brexit vote, but it was becauseforecasters overestimated the negative effect of 
the referendum on consumer confidence. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58764af4e4b0710de27b8737#block-58764af4e4b0710de27b8737>

Speaking of forecasts, Carney suggested the Bank was likely to lift its UK 
growth forecasts in February. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58764a62e4b0710de27b8731#block-58764a62e4b0710de27b8731>

Anil Kashyap of the FPC reckons the risk to financial stability has not yet 
increased because of the election of Donald Trump, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9#block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9>
 but the Bank admitted it was monitoring the president elect’s Twitter account 
given his potential for market moving comments.

The Bank members also spent some time defending the latest bank stress tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760#block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760>
, notably to suggestions they were not rigorous enough.

And there were also concerns about the high levels of consumer credit. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41#block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41>
 
And after some discussion about the buy to let market, the session ends. Chair 
Andrew Tyrie says that “ as usual when we start talking about financial 
stability we end with the housing market”, and thanks them for coming.
 
Is housing market sustainable, with prices relative to income back to levels 
seen in 2008?

Alex Brazier: That rise in level in house prices relative to income has not, 
as it did in 2008, meant a rise in household debt. It’s not house prices per 
se, it’s the level of household debt, and [that] shows a completely different 
picture.
 
Question on the 10.8% growth in consumer credit last year. Is the Bank too 
relaxed or complacent about this?

FPC executive director Alex Brazier says he’s not relaxed: Consumer credit 
growth is difficult to ignore. What are the risks to financial stability? We 
have been discussing the loosening of credit conditions, such as a doubling of 
interest rate free periods for credit cards. We need to be alert and vigilant.

It has been a driver of consumer spending, so it’s important how we should 
address it, as it has a broader economic resilience.
 
Carney and his committee defend the results of the tests, but says he welcomes 
analysis and discussion ( such as by the head of an independent review of banks 
Sir John Vickers, who said the stress tests were not rigorous enough.)

An ITV report 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2017-01-10/sir-john-vickers-bank-of-england-stress-tests-not-tough-enough/>
 said using more rigorous tests would have meant only Lloyds passed, but Carney 
and co said they could not see how this result was achieved and seemed 
satisfied with the outcome of their own tests.
 
Anil Kashyap says he expects it will become exceptional for UK banks to fail 
the stress test in future.
 
Question on bank stress tests, when RBS failed in November: Should we expect 
every year to see at least one bank fail so we can’t say they are not difficult 
enough.

Martin Taylor: People say that anyway. We don’t consider that. We try to set 
stress which is severe and plausible and put the system through the wringer.
 
Meanwhile the pound has hit a new 31 year low against the dollar - excluding 
the flash crash - with the US currency boosted ahead of Donald Trump’s press 
conference on hopes of details of his plans for the country’s economy.Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sterling> has fallen as low as $1.2039 
and is now down 1% at $1.2056. Neil Wilson, senior market analyst at ETX 
Capital, said:

The move looks dollar driven with the buck heavy bid at day highs across the 
board ahead of Donald Trump’s news conference.

It’s now looking very precarious indeed for sterling and we could see it drop 
further as stops are triggered. Cable is down another 1% today and is flirting 
with flash crash lows and could spark more selling.

The correlation between the pound and the FTSE is obvious. The sharp move 
south at 15:18 saw sterling dip half a cent against the dollar in just a minute 
and we witnessed a corresponding move in the FTSE 100 at the exact same time, 
with the index jumping 10 points in 60 seconds. At pixel time it was rocking 
new highs at 7,321, on course for yet another record close.
 
Question: Do you monitor Trump’s Twitter account in case he says something,.

Carney: Yes. We monitor your Twitter account, chairman. So yes we follow it.

We look forward to working with the new US members.
 
Tyrie: is Trump a risk to financial stability?

Anil Kashyap: The committee hasn’t discussed this but personally, the first 
thing will be Trump filling the vice chair position at Federal Reserve. That 
could change the way the Fed negotiates over financial stability issues.

It still takes 60 votes in Senate to do many things, anything attached to tax 
and spending review you need 50. Anything to do with rolling back Dodd Franks, 
they can’t do that will just 50 votes.

He can do personal changes immediately.

Tyrie: so has risk up or stayed the same?

The same, the number of things the US can do unilaterally that he can trigger 
is limited in the short term.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/16/Factsheet__Buying_a_home.txt

Buying a home can be a long and complex process, but typically it involves 
going through these steps:

Find out how much you can borrow

Call a mortgage broker to get an idea of how much you can borrow. He or she 
will be able to search the market for the best available deal and to help you 
maximise your borrowing power. You will need to give details of how much you 
earn and all of the things that you spend money on each month.

When working out how much you can afford to put down as a deposit, remember to 
keep some savings aside to meet stamp duty and other fees, and to furnish your 
new home. Get information about the different mortgages on offer, and start 
thinking about whether you want to go for a fixed or variable-rate deal.

Define your criteria

Decide what you are looking for in a property – whether you need parking and a 
garden, how many bedrooms you need, if it’s a flat, whether you want it to be 
freehold or leasehold – and pick an area on which to focus your search.

Consider what you want out of the location: are local schools, transport links 
and shops important to you? How long are you planning to live in the property 
for? Here are10 things to think about before you rush into a property purchase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/apr/10/10-things-property-market>.

Beginning the search

Start scanning the internet and local newspapers and register with estate 
agents - some properties sell before they are advertised online, so it is worth 
being on the agents’ books. If you see a property you want to look at, call the 
agent and arrange a viewing.

Bear in mind there are lots of different property websites out there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/sep/24/property-websites-alternatives-rightmove>
 you can use for your search – you don’t just have to use the big ones.

Out and about

Visit some properties. You are unlikely to find the home you want straight 
away, so don’t despair and don’t be tempted into edging over your budget if you 
don’t like the first place you look at. This is probably going to be your 
biggest financial outlay, so it is worth waiting until you find the right place.

Don’t be shy about asking questions when you are looking around a property, or 
afterwards. The estate agent should be able to provide you with basic details 
about the property, and to pass on any other queries to the people who are 
selling.

Making an offer

When you find somewhere you like, make an offer. Before you do so, try to 
glean as much information from the estate agent as possible. Ask how long it’s 
been on the market and if the seller wants a quick sale. Some websites have 
details of when a property was first listed, although this won’t tell you if 
the seller has switched to a new agent.

Many buyers initially make an offer below the asking price, and often this is 
accepted. You may want to start low and negotiate with the agent to find a 
price that satisfies both parties. But if you want to be sure you get the 
property you like – and you think it is worth the asking price – you may want 
to offer the full amount straight away.

Acceptance

If your offer is accepted, ask the estate agent to take the property off the 
market. You now need to instruct a solicitor. If you need to find a solicitor, 
ask for a few quotes and follow up personal recommendations.

Getting a mortgage

Once your offer has been accepted, call your broker or a lender to sort out 
your mortgage application. At this point you will need to provide lots of 
paperwork showing your income and outgoings.

Paperwork

Instruct your solicitor to start working on a contract. They will also send 
the seller a list of questions to answer, including a questionnaire asking 
which fixtures and fittings they intend to leave when they move out.

Surveys

Your lender should arrange a surveyor to value the property within a few days 
of agreeing the mortgage in principle. Its valuation will be very simple and 
you should arrange your own survey to get an idea of what problems there may be 
with the property.

To save money, it can sometimes be worth asking the lender’s surveyor to also 
put together a survey for you, but this is not always the case. Ask for a quote 
and compare it with quotes from other surveyors - again, ask around for 
recommendations.

The most expensive and comprehensive option is to ask the surveyor for a full 
structural survey of the building, and this is particularly worth doing if you 
are buying a property that is very old, has been extensively renovated or 
clearly needs work. It is also a good idea if you are planning to build an 
extension or structural changes to the building. However, a cheaper – albeit 
less comprehensive – homebuyer’s report should highlight any major problems and 
is a good option in other circumstances.

A good surveyor will talk to you before the survey to find out if you have any 
particular concerns and afterwards to highlight and explain any issues.

Next steps

Read the survey when it arrives. If there are a lot of problems with the 
property and you are not happy to carry on with the purchase, then act quickly 
to let everyone know, before you incur any other costs.

If you do want to pursue the purchase, but the survey advises that you get 
quotes for work that needs doing, arrange for that to be done - you will need 
to talk to the estate agent to arrange access to the property.

If a lot of work needs doing, you may want to go back to the seller and 
renegotiate on the price you are paying for the property.

Exchange of contracts

After your solicitor or conveyancer has completed all the necessary checks 
you’ll be asked to sign a contract legally committing you to the purchase. At 
this point you will need to pay a deposit for the property – usually at least 
5% of the price but more typically 10%. At this point you will usually agree a 
date to complete the sale.

Book a removal van

When you know your moving date you can start organising how to get your 
possessions to your new home. This could involve hiring a van and doing it 
yourself or hiring professional removal men. Either way, you should act fast to 
give yourself the best chance of finding a company to help when you need at a 
good price. You may also want to hireprofessional packers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2014/aug/23/moving-pay-packing> to pack 
up your belongings.

Buy buildings insurance

Your lender will expect you to have buildings insurance in place for the date 
of completion. It will quote a rebuild cost in its valuation – this is the 
amount you need to cover.

Completion

This is when the property finally becomes yours. When your solicitor tells you 
that the sale is completed you can pick the keys up from the estate agent. This 
will probably be the day that you move in, unless you are having work done in 
advance. It is likely to be a stressful day, even if everything goes according 
to plan, but should feel worthwhile after your first night in your new home.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/17/Brexit__a_brain_drain_and_Trump_s_tweets___Guardian_Social_as_it_happened.txt

4.35pm GMT 16:35  <> 

See you next week

Thanks for getting involved today in a broad discussion involving Donald 
Trump, Brexit and a northern “brain drain” in the UK. We’ll be back next week 
with another opportunity to discuss the week’s news and features with our 
journalists below the line, but in the meantime you can get in touch with any 
feedback. Email sarah.marsh@theguardian.com or matthew.holmes@theguardian.com 
with suggestions, or continue the conversation below, where we’ll also be 
checking in. Have a great weekend.


Lastly from us today, we’ll leave you with this: random hugs all round!
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15301515> normanshovel  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15301515> 25 November 2016 4:21pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88222201> 
If you ever feel like you're have the joy of being alive suffocated out of you 
by nihilistic journalism and opinion pieces, one thing that's worth hanging on 
to: I've met a lot of middle class liberal Guardian reading types recently, 
they're alright if you know how to take them, can be a bit weird and intense 
about some things, but they are not that much different from everyone else. My 
advice , if you're coming home from work and you spot a MCLG-type, give them a 
random hug. It doesn't matter how sweaty or work-dirty you are, just do it!

Thanks Norman.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58386609e4b0e0ad2d75d03a%23block-58386609e4b0e0ad2d75d03a>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58386609e4b0e0ad2d75d03a%23block-58386609e4b0e0ad2d75d03a>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58386609e4b0e0ad2d75d03a%23block-58386609e4b0e0ad2d75d03a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58386609e4b0e0ad2d75d03a%23block-58386609e4b0e0ad2d75d03a>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58386609e4b0e0ad2d75d03a%23block-58386609e4b0e0ad2d75d03a>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58386609e4b0e0ad2d75d03a%23block-58386609e4b0e0ad2d75d03a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.20pm GMT 16:20  <> 

Conversation of the week: should the government define 'unconventional' sex?

Guardian readers

Each week we ask our team of moderators to highlight a conversation they 
enjoyed reading or felt was particularly constructive or interesting.

First today was the discussion below a news article after it was announced 
that the UK was to censor online videos of “non-conventional” sex acts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/23/censor-non-conventional-sex-acts-online-internet-pornography>
. Many readers disagreed with the plan.

What, how and why? The UK's new online porn restrictions explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/25/what-how-and-why-the-uks-new-online-porn-restrictions-explained>
‘No place in a free and open society’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3274279> ranelagh75  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3274279> 23 November 2016 12:36pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88055585> 
This sort of censorship has no place in a free and open society.

Adults should be free to consume whatever material they want, regardless of 
how distasteful others may find it, provided all subjects involved are 
performing with consent.

End of story.

‘Stunningly, hilariously naive’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14495786> Trumbledon  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14495786> 23 November 2016 12:39pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88055731> 
The only thing more astonishing than the fact this ban is happening at all, is 
the fact it appears the people enforcing it think it'll be possible to enforce.

Stunningly, hilariously naive.

‘Who was even pushing for this to happen?’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15928365> jgw791  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15928365> 23 November 2016 12:52pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88056603> 
Right so it's now illegal to show female ejaculation which in itself is not 
only legal but perfectly natural. But films can still show terrorism, violence, 
drug use and murder.

Or how about sports like UFC, it's not really conventional to beat someone 
until they pass out.

It's completely illogical, and furthermore who was even pushing for this to 
happen ?

“Government should not be regulating what is moral ... just what is consenting’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2610768> crankyreader  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2610768> 24 November 2016 5:28am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88107958> 
What the hell kind of a category is "unconventional acts"? Who gets to define 
that? When it comes to sex, government should not be in the business of 
regulating what is moral, normal, decent, or conventional; just what is 
CONSENTING.

What do you think? Click on the comments to explore the conversation further 
or share your views below the line here.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381257e4b0da4920d6c0a5%23block-58381257e4b0da4920d6c0a5>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381257e4b0da4920d6c0a5%23block-58381257e4b0da4920d6c0a5>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381257e4b0da4920d6c0a5%23block-58381257e4b0da4920d6c0a5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381257e4b0da4920d6c0a5%23block-58381257e4b0da4920d6c0a5>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381257e4b0da4920d6c0a5%23block-58381257e4b0da4920d6c0a5>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381257e4b0da4920d6c0a5%23block-58381257e4b0da4920d6c0a5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.12pm GMT 16:12  <> 

London for one reader wasn’t paved with gold 

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14723477> Terence Cass  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14723477> 25 November 2016 4:02pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88221117> 
My experience in living in "London" for short periods in Lewisham, Golders 
Green and Selsdon was that most people lived in their own enclave . The idea of 
"living in London" seemed far from the truth. I did have a stepson who gave up 
his job as a supervisor in Tescos in Northants where he could have afforded a 
nice flat to go to London so he could go to the top clubs like Ministry of 
Sound. For that he lived in a room no bigger than a coffin. he had to put his 
bedside table on the bed to open or close the door. how many in London like him?

Updated at 4.14pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58386214e4b0e0ad2d75d021%23block-58386214e4b0e0ad2d75d021>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58386214e4b0e0ad2d75d021%23block-58386214e4b0e0ad2d75d021>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58386214e4b0e0ad2d75d021%23block-58386214e4b0e0ad2d75d021&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58386214e4b0e0ad2d75d021%23block-58386214e4b0e0ad2d75d021>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58386214e4b0e0ad2d75d021%23block-58386214e4b0e0ad2d75d021>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58386214e4b0e0ad2d75d021%23block-58386214e4b0e0ad2d75d021&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.01pm GMT 16:01  <> 

Fabric makes a comeback, but what does it mean for London nightlife?

Will Coldwell

In September, Fabric had its licence revoked following the deaths of two 
18-year-olds who took ecstasy while at the venue. Three months later, after an 
impressive campaign from the nightlife community, theclub is set to reopen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/fabric-nightclub-to-reopen-under-strict-new-licensing-conditions>
.


Fabric nightclub to reopen under strict new licensing conditions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/fabric-nightclub-to-reopen-under-strict-new-licensing-conditions>
A deal was struck between Fabric, the Met and Islington council. It’s not 
plain sailing though;Fabric <https://www.theguardian.com/music/fabric> has 
agreed to 32 conditions that include new ID scanning systems, enhanced 
searching, covert surveillance within the club, lifetime bans for anyone found 
in possession of drugs and no entry for anyone under 19. The licensing 
conditions are evidence that the council and police still prioritise a 
“zero-tolerance” approach to drugs in clubs (which, let’s be honest, is 
probably impossible to ever achieve) over anything else, such as pragmatically 
improving the safety of those inside.

 Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
Whether clubbers will care to enter a venue that has to enforce a draconian 
level of security simply to listen to music and dance will be the biggest worry 
for Fabric’s management.


On a more positive note, London (and the UK’s) nightlife community has never 
seemed more focused and active; Fabric’s closure provoked real action. But 
while the club may be set to reopen, do you feel that London’s nightlife has 
been saved?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381564e4b0cc60d3476f36%23block-58381564e4b0cc60d3476f36>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381564e4b0cc60d3476f36%23block-58381564e4b0cc60d3476f36>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381564e4b0cc60d3476f36%23block-58381564e4b0cc60d3476f36&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381564e4b0cc60d3476f36%23block-58381564e4b0cc60d3476f36>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381564e4b0cc60d3476f36%23block-58381564e4b0cc60d3476f36>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381564e4b0cc60d3476f36%23block-58381564e4b0cc60d3476f36&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.29pm GMT 15:29  <> 

Readers on the UK 'northern braindrain' – is London the only way?

Guardian readers

Leaving the north of England for London is, for some, the only way to find 
work – that is according to a new study that says there is a “brain drain” from 
the north, with310,000 graduates moving south in the last decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/19/brain-drain-southward-310000-graduates-left-north-ten-years>
.

The great northern brain drain: 'I daydream about moving back'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/northern-brain-drain-moving-back-london>
Readers shared their experiences above the line in this article commissioned 
to further tell the story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/northern-readers-moving-to-london-for-work>
, and there was lively debate after it was published – many of you also telling 
stories of moving the other way.

‘London’s great for the weekend, up north is better for an asthmatic’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16445366> Lazyasalurcher  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16445366> 21 November 2016 10:00pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/87943572> 
Lived in London (well, one of the suburbs at the end of the Met line) most of 
my life. Loved the city, the food, the nightlife, the culture etc.

Moved up north, miss the things that make London great. Don't miss the 
traffic, the pollution, the crush of people on the tube. Love the walks in the 
countryside up here, love the accent.

London's great for the weekend, up north is better for a middle aged wheezing 
asthmatic with an energetic hound.

‘Organizations need to get their HQs out of London’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2038975> ksquared  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2038975> 21 November 2016 8:48pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/87938716> 
Organizations need to get their HQs OUT of London. All those charities REALLY 
don't need to be there. They can have a small media/advocacy office that they 
share with other orgs and move the entire rest of their staff somewhere 
cheaper. In the meantime they are wasting their supporters' money on London 
wages and rents, and doing nothing to support a better economic balance in this 
country. Drives me crazy.

‘I’d love to move back to Manchester’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4044314> Erica9  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4044314> 21 November 2016 8:26pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/87937321> 
I'd love to move back to Manchester. The reminder that our mayor is a former 
"Mr Gay UK" just made me well up with pride. An affordable, liberal city with 
character. Problem is - I've looked for jobs in my specialist field ever since 
I graduated, and haven't seen a thing. Stuck down here in my overpriced 5 
person house share in the south.



 The front page of the Manchester Guardian newspaper, 5 May 1821. Photograph: 
Frank Baron for the Guardian 
‘The Guardian can help the north and save itself financially by moving back 
there’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3794837> bartelbe  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3794837> 21 November 2016 10:17pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/87944923> 
The Guardian can help the North and save itself financially by moving back 
north. With modern communication technlogy there is no good reason to be in 
London. Sell the Guardian London building and rent inexpensive offices up north.

Surely the survival of the Manchester Guardian is more important than the 
desire of Guardian writers to live in London?

And one more – presumably from the West Midlands?

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12099483> turpin_looms  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12099483> 21 November 2016 6:08pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/87929394> 
the other week there was a piece about the number of Londoners moving out to 
Birmingham. It wasn't labelled a brain drain though, so presumably they were 
all thicko's going in that direction;)

What do you think – have you made the move? Would you? If you aren’t from the 
UK, have you noticed a similar debate about so-called “brain drain” to or from 
the capital?

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583813fae4b0da4920d6c0b6%23block-583813fae4b0da4920d6c0b6>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583813fae4b0da4920d6c0b6%23block-583813fae4b0da4920d6c0b6>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583813fae4b0da4920d6c0b6%23block-583813fae4b0da4920d6c0b6&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583813fae4b0da4920d6c0b6%23block-583813fae4b0da4920d6c0b6>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583813fae4b0da4920d6c0b6%23block-583813fae4b0da4920d6c0b6>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583813fae4b0da4920d6c0b6%23block-583813fae4b0da4920d6c0b6&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.14pm GMT 15:14  <> 

And on that “no publicity is bad publicity” point raised by another reader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/live/2016/nov/25/are-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week?page=with:block-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2#block-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2>
 below:

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13675666> feliciafarrel  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13675666> 25 November 2016 2:59pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88216939> 
Is there no such thing as bad publicity for Trump?

During the election campaign, because of the huge animosity to Hillary (and 
Obama) it was probably true that all publicity was good publicity for Trump. 
That's not going to be the case once he takes office. Unfortunately I think he 
knows it, and already he is moderating his tone and output.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3008349> kizbot  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3008349> 25 November 2016 2:56pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88216746> 
There is no such thing as bad publicity in many ways... look at all the sleb 
careers built on it... Trump obviously thinks being Prez is a bit like being a 
Kardashian or Paris Hilton...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838521ee4b0cc60d347706a%23block-5838521ee4b0cc60d347706a>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838521ee4b0cc60d347706a%23block-5838521ee4b0cc60d347706a>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838521ee4b0cc60d347706a%23block-5838521ee4b0cc60d347706a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838521ee4b0cc60d347706a%23block-5838521ee4b0cc60d347706a>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838521ee4b0cc60d347706a%23block-5838521ee4b0cc60d347706a>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838521ee4b0cc60d347706a%23block-5838521ee4b0cc60d347706a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.55pm GMT 14:55  <> 

A couple of your comments on Trump vs the media, now:

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12872910> Tystnaden  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12872910> 25 November 2016 2:20pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88214218> 
Whatever he's selling, the media are buying.

Corruption within the Trump foundation? Nah, let's report on Pence getting 
booed at Hamilton instead, because, you know, clicks.

Trump's long history of corruption and dodgy dealing? Nah, let's report 
disproportionately on Hillary's non-scandal and treat Trump like a joke.

The media did as much as anybody to elect Trump during this election.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1228048> KTBFFH  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1228048> 25 November 2016 2:49pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88216334> 
Until people who voted remain at least try to acknowledge that some of the 
British population may have a valid reason for voting to leave the EU, we're 
never going to get back to more progressive politics

With regard to this quoted passage above the line, it mirrors similar claims 
made about many of those who voted Brexit or Trump. The thing is that I still 
haven't heard an explanation of those reasons that makes sense beyond the 
obvious ones.

Seeking to excuse or explain away the fact that millions of people have used 
their democratic choices in what by all ordinary measures are illogical and 
inexplicable ways may simply be ignoring a plain truth that those people 
decided that giving vent to their racism and xenophobia was worth the 
economic/social risk.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583850b1e4b0cc60d3477063%23block-583850b1e4b0cc60d3477063>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583850b1e4b0cc60d3477063%23block-583850b1e4b0cc60d3477063>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583850b1e4b0cc60d3477063%23block-583850b1e4b0cc60d3477063&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583850b1e4b0cc60d3477063%23block-583850b1e4b0cc60d3477063>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583850b1e4b0cc60d3477063%23block-583850b1e4b0cc60d3477063>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583850b1e4b0cc60d3477063%23block-583850b1e4b0cc60d3477063&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.41pm GMT 14:41  <> 

Trump vs the 'mainstream media': is fairness and truth at risk?

Ed Pilkington

The headline on my piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/22/election-2016-donald-trump-media-coverage>
 on the relationship between Donald Trump and the “mainstream media” 
crystalised everything I had been trying to say.


Trump v the media: did his tactics mortally wound the fourth estate?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/22/election-2016-donald-trump-media-coverage>
Overnight, the president-elect had released a two-minute video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7xX_KaStFT8> direct to camera on YouTube 
setting out his plans for his first 100 days. It was classic Trump – using the 
power of social media to bypass TV news and press outlets entirely and speak 
directly to the American people. What he’s doing is to cut out the role of the 
media as a filter that stands between a president and the public, and by doing 
so he is raising a serious threat to many of the values that media outlets hold 
dear: truth, fact and fairness to name but three.
 Photograph: Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381275e4b0da4920d6c0a6%23block-58381275e4b0da4920d6c0a6>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381275e4b0da4920d6c0a6%23block-58381275e4b0da4920d6c0a6>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381275e4b0da4920d6c0a6%23block-58381275e4b0da4920d6c0a6&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381275e4b0da4920d6c0a6%23block-58381275e4b0da4920d6c0a6>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381275e4b0da4920d6c0a6%23block-58381275e4b0da4920d6c0a6>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381275e4b0da4920d6c0a6%23block-58381275e4b0da4920d6c0a6&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.36pm GMT 14:36  <> 

Is there no such thing as bad publicity for Trump?
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13107777> imperium3  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13107777> 25 November 2016 2:15pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88213827> 
Regarding Trump, I think his entire philosophy is based on the old saw "There 
is no such thing as bad publicity."


He does not mind upsetting people, in fact by this point he seems to be doing 
it deliberately. Because when everyone's talking about the latest thing he came 
out with, or the latest group he offended,they are still talking about Donald 
Trump.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2%23block-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2%23block-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2%23block-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2%23block-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2%23block-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2%23block-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.17pm GMT 14:17  <> 

How the election of Trump can kick off a new global feminist movement

Anna Leach

A view from Anna Leach, who works on the Guardian’s Global Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development> network. 


After the shocking (and some might say foolish) results of election this year 
in the US and UK, can developed nations continue to take a superior view over 
the political injustices of the world?

Electing a self-evident misogynist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/21/donald-trump-rolled-back-gains-american-women-torrent-misogyny>
 as leader of the “free” world shows that sexism is alive and well all over. 
And although the contexts are different, we can find strength from working 
together.


Donald Trump is a vile misogynist - but he's not the only one | Jonathan 
Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/21/donald-trump-rolled-back-gains-american-women-torrent-misogyny>
How can feminist activists in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/23/how-chinese-feminists-can-inspire-women-to-stand-up-to-trump>
 inspire women in Germany? What canRussian women teach us 
<http://www.nybooks.com/daily/2016/11/10/trump-election-autocracy-rules-for-survival/>
 about fighting the state for human rights? How cancollege students in 
Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/25/seven-global-drama-womens-rights-violence-rape-trafficking-bangladesh>
 and the US support each other to stop sexual harassment?
 Photograph: Albin Lohr-Jone/Pacific/Barcroft 
In times of crisis, solidarity between those who face discrimination can help 
us fight back against the forces we don’t agree with. We’ll be covering the 
global struggle on ourwomen and girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/girls-and-women>
 series.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381320e4b0e0ad2d75ce76%23block-58381320e4b0e0ad2d75ce76>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381320e4b0e0ad2d75ce76%23block-58381320e4b0e0ad2d75ce76>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381320e4b0e0ad2d75ce76%23block-58381320e4b0e0ad2d75ce76&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381320e4b0e0ad2d75ce76%23block-58381320e4b0e0ad2d75ce76>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381320e4b0e0ad2d75ce76%23block-58381320e4b0e0ad2d75ce76>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381320e4b0e0ad2d75ce76%23block-58381320e4b0e0ad2d75ce76&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.52pm GMT 13:52  <> 

A few of you have been responding to our colleague Martn Belam’s thoughts below
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/live/2016/nov/25/are-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week?page=with:block-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1#block-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1>
 on Donald Trump’s “dead cat strategy”.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4010847> MrWaterproof  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4010847> 25 November 2016 1:44pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88211482> 
Is Trump's tweeting part of a dead cat strategy. Do you mean the one he wears 
on his head?
Donald Trump’s Thanksgiving message: ‘Tensions just don’t heal overnight’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/24/donald-trump-thanksgiving-message-tensions-video>
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14261501> Robert Jenkins  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14261501> 25 November 2016 1:47pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88211687> 
I think that trumps mo is pretty clear now: make any process appear as chaotic 
as possible and leak names that are wildly inappropriate then when the picks 
are merely terrible people will think it's not as bad as it could of been.

We saw it play out constantly in the campaign but most clearly in the debates 
where objectively trump performed awfully but the expectations were so low that 
it was considered a win for him to even turn up.

Government on those terms will wear thin very quickly
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12434934> vagues  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12434934> 25 November 2016 1:53pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88212172> 
I like the dead cat analogy. Perhaps that was why people voted for him... to 
hide something even more sinister.

Updated at 1.55pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838409be4b0da4920d6c1b0%23block-5838409be4b0da4920d6c1b0>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838409be4b0da4920d6c1b0%23block-5838409be4b0da4920d6c1b0>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838409be4b0da4920d6c1b0%23block-5838409be4b0da4920d6c1b0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838409be4b0da4920d6c1b0%23block-5838409be4b0da4920d6c1b0>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838409be4b0da4920d6c1b0%23block-5838409be4b0da4920d6c1b0>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838409be4b0da4920d6c1b0%23block-5838409be4b0da4920d6c1b0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.37pm GMT 13:37  <> 

Before we move on to talk a bit more about some of the other stories that have 
got you talking this week, a couple more views on the Brexit questions raised 
by Anne Perkins (see 12:05 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/live/2016/nov/25/are-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week?page=with:block-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97#block-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97>
).

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15888417> bopo07  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15888417> 25 November 2016 1:32pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88210623> 
Until people who voted remain at least try to acknowledge that some of the 
British population may have a valid reason for voting to leave the EU, we're 
never going to get back to more progressive politics. The people who may have 
voted Labour in the past, and therefore, the ones who offer the number of votes 
you need, feel that globalisation has not worked for them or their communities. 
Now, either try to understand this and move forward, and be ready for when the 
opportunity - inevitably - arises, or you can just carry on blaming Brexit for 
everything, calling people stupid rascists and never regain political power. 
"It's simple, stupid."
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14954660> bitterengine  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14954660> 25 November 2016 1:21pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88209723> 
I think because the level of debate before the referendum was so poor and full 
of lies and emotion, that people have been left quite bitter. We didn't even 
come closer to the question "Would Britain be better off outside the EU?" We 
had a vote on it but our understanding is no better than a year a go.

Updated at 1.38pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58383e1ae4b0e0ad2d75cf6a%23block-58383e1ae4b0e0ad2d75cf6a>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58383e1ae4b0e0ad2d75cf6a%23block-58383e1ae4b0e0ad2d75cf6a>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58383e1ae4b0e0ad2d75cf6a%23block-58383e1ae4b0e0ad2d75cf6a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58383e1ae4b0e0ad2d75cf6a%23block-58383e1ae4b0e0ad2d75cf6a>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58383e1ae4b0e0ad2d75cf6a%23block-58383e1ae4b0e0ad2d75cf6a>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58383e1ae4b0e0ad2d75cf6a%23block-58383e1ae4b0e0ad2d75cf6a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.14pm GMT 13:14  <> 

Is Donald Trump's tweeting part of a dead cat strategy?

Martin Belam

I feel like every day I am waking up, and finding myself working out how I am 
going to explain to people in our morning@GuardianNews 
<https://twitter.com/guardiannews> round-up what Donald Trump was tweeting 
about last night.
Guardian news (@guardiannews) 
2️⃣ We regret to inform you that the president-elect of the US has been 
tweeting againhttps://t.co/LsxUfLwojl <https://t.co/LsxUfLwojl> 
pic.twitter.com/trdT6sdqWh <https://t.co/trdT6sdqWh>
 <https://twitter.com/guardiannews/status/800972767814418432> November 22, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/guardiannews/status/800972767814418432> 
It seems completely unprecedented to have the president-elect of the US 
telling us thatthe cast of a play have been rude to his VP-to-be 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/800298286204723200>, or that the 
New York Times is failing 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/798861300453539840>, or that he’s 
thinking about appointingthis person 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/801110690387857408> or that person 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/800332639844659201> to a role.

It also gives us a question as journalists. Does he do it as part of a “dead 
cat strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/20/lynton-crosby-and-dead-cat-won-election-conservatives-labour-intellectually-lazy>
” - where you throw a dead cat on the table to distract from something else?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1%23block-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1%23block-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1%23block-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1%23block-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1%23block-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1%23block-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.06pm GMT 13:06  <> 

Another thought from a reader on that Brexit question:
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4447740> Johanni  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4447740> 25 November 2016 1:04pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88208492> 
Are we too quick to blame Brexit for everything?
Yes - primarily because we haven't Brexited yet! Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583836c6e4b0e0ad2d75cf46%23block-583836c6e4b0e0ad2d75cf46>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583836c6e4b0e0ad2d75cf46%23block-583836c6e4b0e0ad2d75cf46>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583836c6e4b0e0ad2d75cf46%23block-583836c6e4b0e0ad2d75cf46&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583836c6e4b0e0ad2d75cf46%23block-583836c6e4b0e0ad2d75cf46>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583836c6e4b0e0ad2d75cf46%23block-583836c6e4b0e0ad2d75cf46>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-583836c6e4b0e0ad2d75cf46%23block-583836c6e4b0e0ad2d75cf46&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.02pm GMT 13:02  <> 

US readers: how was the Thanksgiving dinner table?

Colleagues in our US office invite you to share your thoughts after what many 
feared would be a fraught atmosphere at the dinner table on Thanksgiving – in 
this open thread

Open thread: was your Thanksgiving fraught with election arguments?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/thanksgiving-election-arguments-open-thread>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58383610e4b0da4920d6c17a%23block-58383610e4b0da4920d6c17a>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58383610e4b0da4920d6c17a%23block-58383610e4b0da4920d6c17a>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58383610e4b0da4920d6c17a%23block-58383610e4b0da4920d6c17a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58383610e4b0da4920d6c17a%23block-58383610e4b0da4920d6c17a>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58383610e4b0da4920d6c17a%23block-58383610e4b0da4920d6c17a>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58383610e4b0da4920d6c17a%23block-58383610e4b0da4920d6c17a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.43pm GMT 12:43  <> 

Whatever your opinion, Brexit is not going away (or perhaps even coming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/25/britain-not-ready-trigger-article-50-april-brexit-malta-pm>
) any time soon – and, in line with that picture of former prime minister David 
Cameron, the most commented piece on the Guardian today is this on John Major’s 
recent comments:


John Major: case for second Brexit referendum is credible
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/25/brexit-sir-john-major-says-perfectly-credible-case-for-second-referendum>
Updated at 12.45pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838317ce4b0e0ad2d75cf27%23block-5838317ce4b0e0ad2d75cf27>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838317ce4b0e0ad2d75cf27%23block-5838317ce4b0e0ad2d75cf27>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838317ce4b0e0ad2d75cf27%23block-5838317ce4b0e0ad2d75cf27&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838317ce4b0e0ad2d75cf27%23block-5838317ce4b0e0ad2d75cf27>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838317ce4b0e0ad2d75cf27%23block-5838317ce4b0e0ad2d75cf27>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838317ce4b0e0ad2d75cf27%23block-5838317ce4b0e0ad2d75cf27&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.25pm GMT 12:25  <> 

Readers are sharing their views in response to Anne Perkins’ question below – 
share yours in the comments or click the links to get involved in the 
conversation

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16334730> Fwaffy  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16334730> 25 November 2016 12:02pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88203697> 
Are we too quick to blame Brexit for everything

It may be true that reasoned and nuance discussions are few and far between 
these days, and that people will lash out at a target that best suits whatever 
opinions they already hold. I think there's been a surge of this kind of 
reciprocal shouting because of the recent furore and hyperbole around the 
referendum campaign, which politicised a large group of people who previously 
had little interest in the system. In other words I blame Brexit.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15038167> PacoReidy  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15038167> 25 November 2016 12:10pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88204326> 
"Are we too quick to blame Brexit for everything?"

"We"? 

Five months on, there's no evidence of great popular opposition to leaving the 
EU. The Lib Dems are the only major party in Eng and Wales opposing Brexit and 
their poll ratings are stuck in single figures.
 David Cameron in 2005. Remember him? Photograph: Scott Barbour/Getty Images  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14133985> apodictic  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14133985> 25 November 2016 12:17pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88204923> 
It seems to me that Cameron, Osborne, May et al are to blame. There was no 
need for a referendum. It was reckless, it was political vanity, it was 
irresponsible and without a contingency plan they are negligent. And Labour are 
to blame for (still) not providing a credible opposition and alternative 
narrative. Brexit voters are to blame for being gullible and fantasists.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13107777> imperium3  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13107777> 25 November 2016 12:08pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88204201> 
Are we too quick to blame Brexit for everything?

Yes. In fairness it's not a new trend - newspapers are always keen to blame 
long term economic trends on the most recent event.

The same bad news stories which are currently all being blamed on Brexit, 
would have all been blamed on Conservative government policies before the 
referendum, and before 2010 they would have all been blamed on the global 
financial crisis. Simple narratives are seductive, but usually wrong.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58382ce6e4b0cc60d3476fb4%23block-58382ce6e4b0cc60d3476fb4>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58382ce6e4b0cc60d3476fb4%23block-58382ce6e4b0cc60d3476fb4>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58382ce6e4b0cc60d3476fb4%23block-58382ce6e4b0cc60d3476fb4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58382ce6e4b0cc60d3476fb4%23block-58382ce6e4b0cc60d3476fb4>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58382ce6e4b0cc60d3476fb4%23block-58382ce6e4b0cc60d3476fb4>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58382ce6e4b0cc60d3476fb4%23block-58382ce6e4b0cc60d3476fb4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.05pm GMT 12:05  <> 

An astonishing autumn statement

Anne Perkins

The autumn statement was astonishing. Nothing for the so-called Jams, the 
families who are just managing. And, maybe even more shocking, nothing at all 
for the NHS or, more specifically, for councils so they can afford to provide 
social care for older and vulnerable people –even though it is the biggest 
single cause of the NHS crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/the-guardian-view-on-the-nhs-cash-crisis-social-care-comes-first>
.


Eight charts to help you understand the autumn statement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/24/charts-autumn-statement-obr-spending-deficit-gdp>
But just when it seemed things couldn’t be worse, along came the Institute for 
Fiscal Studies’analysis of what the numbers mean for real people. The single 
most striking conclusion was that by 2021 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/ifs-warnsf-biggest-squeeze-on-pay-for-70-years-autumn-statement>
, for most families pay would only just be back at pre-2008 levels.

Meanwhile the same crew that rubbished the judges for doing their job of 
adjudicating on a legal row – also known as judging – was back on the airwaves 
yesterday heaping scorn on the IFS for doing its job of studying budgets and 
mapping their consequences. There are some senior politicians who are beginning 
to sound like the Tories’ Breitbart wing.

Or do you think they have a point? Are those of us who voted remain too quick 
to blame Brexit for everything (after all, the other EU economies are not 
exactly booming)? And is it legitimate for the 48% to keep fighting for what we 
believe in, or does there come a point when we have to get on and live with it?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97%23block-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97%23block-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97%23block-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97%23block-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97%23block-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97%23block-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.57am GMT 11:57  <> 

Welcome

Sarah Marsh

Hello everyone. We’re looking forward to starting our weekly social, where we 
gather with readers to discuss the week’s top stories. We will have lots of 
expert comment and views from journalists above the line. If you want to talk 
about anything specific, however, let us know in the comments or by emailing: 
sarah.marsh@theguardian.com
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381ba6e4b0da4920d6c0eb%23block-58381ba6e4b0da4920d6c0eb>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381ba6e4b0da4920d6c0eb%23block-58381ba6e4b0da4920d6c0eb>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381ba6e4b0da4920d6c0eb%23block-58381ba6e4b0da4920d6c0eb&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381ba6e4b0da4920d6c0eb%23block-58381ba6e4b0da4920d6c0eb>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20a%20brain%20drain%20and%20Trump's%20tweets%20%E2%80%93%20Guardian%20Social%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381ba6e4b0da4920d6c0eb%23block-58381ba6e4b0da4920d6c0eb>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fare-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58381ba6e4b0da4920d6c0eb%23block-58381ba6e4b0da4920d6c0eb&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
Thanks for getting involved today in a broad discussion involving Donald 
Trump, Brexit and a northern “brain drain” in the UK. We’ll be back next week 
with another opportunity to discuss the week’s news and features with our 
journalists below the line, but in the meantime you can get in touch with any 
feedback. Email sarah.marsh@theguardian.com or matthew.holmes@theguardian.com 
with suggestions, or continue the conversation below, where we’ll also be 
checking in. Have a great weekend.


Lastly from us today, we’ll leave you with this: random hugs all round!
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15301515> normanshovel  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15301515> 25 November 2016 4:21pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88222201> 
If you ever feel like you're have the joy of being alive suffocated out of you 
by nihilistic journalism and opinion pieces, one thing that's worth hanging on 
to: I've met a lot of middle class liberal Guardian reading types recently, 
they're alright if you know how to take them, can be a bit weird and intense 
about some things, but they are not that much different from everyone else. My 
advice , if you're coming home from work and you spot a MCLG-type, give them a 
random hug. It doesn't matter how sweaty or work-dirty you are, just do it!

Thanks Norman.

 
Each week we ask our team of moderators to highlight a conversation they 
enjoyed reading or felt was particularly constructive or interesting.

First today was the discussion below a news article after it was announced 
that the UK was to censor online videos of “non-conventional” sex acts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/23/censor-non-conventional-sex-acts-online-internet-pornography>
. Many readers disagreed with the plan.

What, how and why? The UK's new online porn restrictions explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/25/what-how-and-why-the-uks-new-online-porn-restrictions-explained>
‘No place in a free and open society’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3274279> ranelagh75  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3274279> 23 November 2016 12:36pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88055585> 
This sort of censorship has no place in a free and open society.

Adults should be free to consume whatever material they want, regardless of 
how distasteful others may find it, provided all subjects involved are 
performing with consent.

End of story.

‘Stunningly, hilariously naive’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14495786> Trumbledon  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14495786> 23 November 2016 12:39pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88055731> 
The only thing more astonishing than the fact this ban is happening at all, is 
the fact it appears the people enforcing it think it'll be possible to enforce.

Stunningly, hilariously naive.

‘Who was even pushing for this to happen?’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15928365> jgw791  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15928365> 23 November 2016 12:52pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88056603> 
Right so it's now illegal to show female ejaculation which in itself is not 
only legal but perfectly natural. But films can still show terrorism, violence, 
drug use and murder.

Or how about sports like UFC, it's not really conventional to beat someone 
until they pass out.

It's completely illogical, and furthermore who was even pushing for this to 
happen ?

“Government should not be regulating what is moral ... just what is consenting’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2610768> crankyreader  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2610768> 24 November 2016 5:28am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88107958> 
What the hell kind of a category is "unconventional acts"? Who gets to define 
that? When it comes to sex, government should not be in the business of 
regulating what is moral, normal, decent, or conventional; just what is 
CONSENTING.

What do you think? Click on the comments to explore the conversation further 
or share your views below the line here.

 
London for one reader wasn’t paved with gold 

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14723477> Terence Cass  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14723477> 25 November 2016 4:02pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88221117> 
My experience in living in "London" for short periods in Lewisham, Golders 
Green and Selsdon was that most people lived in their own enclave . The idea of 
"living in London" seemed far from the truth. I did have a stepson who gave up 
his job as a supervisor in Tescos in Northants where he could have afforded a 
nice flat to go to London so he could go to the top clubs like Ministry of 
Sound. For that he lived in a room no bigger than a coffin. he had to put his 
bedside table on the bed to open or close the door. how many in London like him?
 
In September, Fabric had its licence revoked following the deaths of two 
18-year-olds who took ecstasy while at the venue. Three months later, after an 
impressive campaign from the nightlife community, theclub is set to reopen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/fabric-nightclub-to-reopen-under-strict-new-licensing-conditions>
.


Fabric nightclub to reopen under strict new licensing conditions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/fabric-nightclub-to-reopen-under-strict-new-licensing-conditions>
A deal was struck between Fabric, the Met and Islington council. It’s not 
plain sailing though;Fabric <https://www.theguardian.com/music/fabric> has 
agreed to 32 conditions that include new ID scanning systems, enhanced 
searching, covert surveillance within the club, lifetime bans for anyone found 
in possession of drugs and no entry for anyone under 19. The licensing 
conditions are evidence that the council and police still prioritise a 
“zero-tolerance” approach to drugs in clubs (which, let’s be honest, is 
probably impossible to ever achieve) over anything else, such as pragmatically 
improving the safety of those inside.

 Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
Whether clubbers will care to enter a venue that has to enforce a draconian 
level of security simply to listen to music and dance will be the biggest worry 
for Fabric’s management.


On a more positive note, London (and the UK’s) nightlife community has never 
seemed more focused and active; Fabric’s closure provoked real action. But 
while the club may be set to reopen, do you feel that London’s nightlife has 
been saved?
 
Leaving the north of England for London is, for some, the only way to find 
work – that is according to a new study that says there is a “brain drain” from 
the north, with310,000 graduates moving south in the last decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/19/brain-drain-southward-310000-graduates-left-north-ten-years>
.

The great northern brain drain: 'I daydream about moving back'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/northern-brain-drain-moving-back-london>
Readers shared their experiences above the line in this article commissioned 
to further tell the story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/northern-readers-moving-to-london-for-work>
, and there was lively debate after it was published – many of you also telling 
stories of moving the other way.

‘London’s great for the weekend, up north is better for an asthmatic’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16445366> Lazyasalurcher  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16445366> 21 November 2016 10:00pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/87943572> 
Lived in London (well, one of the suburbs at the end of the Met line) most of 
my life. Loved the city, the food, the nightlife, the culture etc.

Moved up north, miss the things that make London great. Don't miss the 
traffic, the pollution, the crush of people on the tube. Love the walks in the 
countryside up here, love the accent.

London's great for the weekend, up north is better for a middle aged wheezing 
asthmatic with an energetic hound.

‘Organizations need to get their HQs out of London’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2038975> ksquared  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2038975> 21 November 2016 8:48pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/87938716> 
Organizations need to get their HQs OUT of London. All those charities REALLY 
don't need to be there. They can have a small media/advocacy office that they 
share with other orgs and move the entire rest of their staff somewhere 
cheaper. In the meantime they are wasting their supporters' money on London 
wages and rents, and doing nothing to support a better economic balance in this 
country. Drives me crazy.

‘I’d love to move back to Manchester’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4044314> Erica9  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4044314> 21 November 2016 8:26pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/87937321> 
I'd love to move back to Manchester. The reminder that our mayor is a former 
"Mr Gay UK" just made me well up with pride. An affordable, liberal city with 
character. Problem is - I've looked for jobs in my specialist field ever since 
I graduated, and haven't seen a thing. Stuck down here in my overpriced 5 
person house share in the south.



 The front page of the Manchester Guardian newspaper, 5 May 1821. Photograph: 
Frank Baron for the Guardian 
‘The Guardian can help the north and save itself financially by moving back 
there’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3794837> bartelbe  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3794837> 21 November 2016 10:17pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/87944923> 
The Guardian can help the North and save itself financially by moving back 
north. With modern communication technlogy there is no good reason to be in 
London. Sell the Guardian London building and rent inexpensive offices up north.

Surely the survival of the Manchester Guardian is more important than the 
desire of Guardian writers to live in London?

And one more – presumably from the West Midlands?

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12099483> turpin_looms  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12099483> 21 November 2016 6:08pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/87929394> 
the other week there was a piece about the number of Londoners moving out to 
Birmingham. It wasn't labelled a brain drain though, so presumably they were 
all thicko's going in that direction;)

What do you think – have you made the move? Would you? If you aren’t from the 
UK, have you noticed a similar debate about so-called “brain drain” to or from 
the capital?

 
And on that “no publicity is bad publicity” point raised by another reader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/live/2016/nov/25/are-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week?page=with:block-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2#block-58384c46e4b0e0ad2d75cfb2>
 below:

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13675666> feliciafarrel  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13675666> 25 November 2016 2:59pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88216939> 
Is there no such thing as bad publicity for Trump?

During the election campaign, because of the huge animosity to Hillary (and 
Obama) it was probably true that all publicity was good publicity for Trump. 
That's not going to be the case once he takes office. Unfortunately I think he 
knows it, and already he is moderating his tone and output.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3008349> kizbot  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3008349> 25 November 2016 2:56pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88216746> 
There is no such thing as bad publicity in many ways... look at all the sleb 
careers built on it... Trump obviously thinks being Prez is a bit like being a 
Kardashian or Paris Hilton...
 
A couple of your comments on Trump vs the media, now:

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12872910> Tystnaden  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12872910> 25 November 2016 2:20pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88214218> 
Whatever he's selling, the media are buying.

Corruption within the Trump foundation? Nah, let's report on Pence getting 
booed at Hamilton instead, because, you know, clicks.

Trump's long history of corruption and dodgy dealing? Nah, let's report 
disproportionately on Hillary's non-scandal and treat Trump like a joke.

The media did as much as anybody to elect Trump during this election.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1228048> KTBFFH  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1228048> 25 November 2016 2:49pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88216334> 
Until people who voted remain at least try to acknowledge that some of the 
British population may have a valid reason for voting to leave the EU, we're 
never going to get back to more progressive politics

With regard to this quoted passage above the line, it mirrors similar claims 
made about many of those who voted Brexit or Trump. The thing is that I still 
haven't heard an explanation of those reasons that makes sense beyond the 
obvious ones.

Seeking to excuse or explain away the fact that millions of people have used 
their democratic choices in what by all ordinary measures are illogical and 
inexplicable ways may simply be ignoring a plain truth that those people 
decided that giving vent to their racism and xenophobia was worth the 
economic/social risk.
 
The headline on my piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/22/election-2016-donald-trump-media-coverage>
 on the relationship between Donald Trump and the “mainstream media” 
crystalised everything I had been trying to say.


Trump v the media: did his tactics mortally wound the fourth estate?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/22/election-2016-donald-trump-media-coverage>
Overnight, the president-elect had released a two-minute video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7xX_KaStFT8> direct to camera on YouTube 
setting out his plans for his first 100 days. It was classic Trump – using the 
power of social media to bypass TV news and press outlets entirely and speak 
directly to the American people. What he’s doing is to cut out the role of the 
media as a filter that stands between a president and the public, and by doing 
so he is raising a serious threat to many of the values that media outlets hold 
dear: truth, fact and fairness to name but three.
 Photograph: Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images  
Is there no such thing as bad publicity for Trump?
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13107777> imperium3  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13107777> 25 November 2016 2:15pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88213827> 
Regarding Trump, I think his entire philosophy is based on the old saw "There 
is no such thing as bad publicity."


He does not mind upsetting people, in fact by this point he seems to be doing 
it deliberately. Because when everyone's talking about the latest thing he came 
out with, or the latest group he offended,they are still talking about Donald 
Trump.
 
A view from Anna Leach, who works on the Guardian’s Global Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development> network. 


After the shocking (and some might say foolish) results of election this year 
in the US and UK, can developed nations continue to take a superior view over 
the political injustices of the world?

Electing a self-evident misogynist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/21/donald-trump-rolled-back-gains-american-women-torrent-misogyny>
 as leader of the “free” world shows that sexism is alive and well all over. 
And although the contexts are different, we can find strength from working 
together.


Donald Trump is a vile misogynist - but he's not the only one | Jonathan 
Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/21/donald-trump-rolled-back-gains-american-women-torrent-misogyny>
How can feminist activists in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/23/how-chinese-feminists-can-inspire-women-to-stand-up-to-trump>
 inspire women in Germany? What canRussian women teach us 
<http://www.nybooks.com/daily/2016/11/10/trump-election-autocracy-rules-for-survival/>
 about fighting the state for human rights? How cancollege students in 
Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/25/seven-global-drama-womens-rights-violence-rape-trafficking-bangladesh>
 and the US support each other to stop sexual harassment?
 Photograph: Albin Lohr-Jone/Pacific/Barcroft 
In times of crisis, solidarity between those who face discrimination can help 
us fight back against the forces we don’t agree with. We’ll be covering the 
global struggle on ourwomen and girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/girls-and-women>
 series.
 
A few of you have been responding to our colleague Martn Belam’s thoughts below
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/live/2016/nov/25/are-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week?page=with:block-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1#block-583811e9e4b0da4920d6c0a1>
 on Donald Trump’s “dead cat strategy”.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4010847> MrWaterproof  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4010847> 25 November 2016 1:44pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88211482> 
Is Trump's tweeting part of a dead cat strategy. Do you mean the one he wears 
on his head?
Donald Trump’s Thanksgiving message: ‘Tensions just don’t heal overnight’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/24/donald-trump-thanksgiving-message-tensions-video>
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14261501> Robert Jenkins  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14261501> 25 November 2016 1:47pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88211687> 
I think that trumps mo is pretty clear now: make any process appear as chaotic 
as possible and leak names that are wildly inappropriate then when the picks 
are merely terrible people will think it's not as bad as it could of been.

We saw it play out constantly in the campaign but most clearly in the debates 
where objectively trump performed awfully but the expectations were so low that 
it was considered a win for him to even turn up.

Government on those terms will wear thin very quickly
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12434934> vagues  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12434934> 25 November 2016 1:53pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88212172> 
I like the dead cat analogy. Perhaps that was why people voted for him... to 
hide something even more sinister.
 
Before we move on to talk a bit more about some of the other stories that have 
got you talking this week, a couple more views on the Brexit questions raised 
by Anne Perkins (see 12:05 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/live/2016/nov/25/are-we-too-quick-to-blame-brexit-for-everything-join-our-live-look-at-the-week?page=with:block-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97#block-5838175de4b0e0ad2d75ce97>
).

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15888417> bopo07  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15888417> 25 November 2016 1:32pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88210623> 
Until people who voted remain at least try to acknowledge that some of the 
British population may have a valid reason for voting to leave the EU, we're 
never going to get back to more progressive politics. The people who may have 
voted Labour in the past, and therefore, the ones who offer the number of votes 
you need, feel that globalisation has not worked for them or their communities. 
Now, either try to understand this and move forward, and be ready for when the 
opportunity - inevitably - arises, or you can just carry on blaming Brexit for 
everything, calling people stupid rascists and never regain political power. 
"It's simple, stupid."
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14954660> bitterengine  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14954660> 25 November 2016 1:21pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88209723> 
I think because the level of debate before the referendum was so poor and full 
of lies and emotion, that people have been left quite bitter. We didn't even 
come closer to the question "Would Britain be better off outside the EU?" We 
had a vote on it but our understanding is no better than a year a go.
 
I feel like every day I am waking up, and finding myself working out how I am 
going to explain to people in our morning@GuardianNews 
<https://twitter.com/guardiannews> round-up what Donald Trump was tweeting 
about last night.
Guardian news (@guardiannews) 
2️⃣ We regret to inform you that the president-elect of the US has been 
tweeting againhttps://t.co/LsxUfLwojl <https://t.co/LsxUfLwojl> 
pic.twitter.com/trdT6sdqWh <https://t.co/trdT6sdqWh>
 <https://twitter.com/guardiannews/status/800972767814418432> November 22, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/guardiannews/status/800972767814418432> 
It seems completely unprecedented to have the president-elect of the US 
telling us thatthe cast of a play have been rude to his VP-to-be 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/800298286204723200>, or that the 
New York Times is failing 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/798861300453539840>, or that he’s 
thinking about appointingthis person 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/801110690387857408> or that person 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/800332639844659201> to a role.

It also gives us a question as journalists. Does he do it as part of a “dead 
cat strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/20/lynton-crosby-and-dead-cat-won-election-conservatives-labour-intellectually-lazy>
” - where you throw a dead cat on the table to distract from something else?
 
Another thought from a reader on that Brexit question:
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4447740> Johanni  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4447740> 25 November 2016 1:04pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88208492> 
Are we too quick to blame Brexit for everything?
Yes - primarily because we haven't Brexited yet!  
Colleagues in our US office invite you to share your thoughts after what many 
feared would be a fraught atmosphere at the dinner table on Thanksgiving – in 
this open thread

Open thread: was your Thanksgiving fraught with election arguments?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/thanksgiving-election-arguments-open-thread> 
Whatever your opinion, Brexit is not going away (or perhaps even coming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/25/britain-not-ready-trigger-article-50-april-brexit-malta-pm>
) any time soon – and, in line with that picture of former prime minister David 
Cameron, the most commented piece on the Guardian today is this on John Major’s 
recent comments:


John Major: case for second Brexit referendum is credible
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/25/brexit-sir-john-major-says-perfectly-credible-case-for-second-referendum> 
Readers are sharing their views in response to Anne Perkins’ question below – 
share yours in the comments or click the links to get involved in the 
conversation

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16334730> Fwaffy  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16334730> 25 November 2016 12:02pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88203697> 
Are we too quick to blame Brexit for everything

It may be true that reasoned and nuance discussions are few and far between 
these days, and that people will lash out at a target that best suits whatever 
opinions they already hold. I think there's been a surge of this kind of 
reciprocal shouting because of the recent furore and hyperbole around the 
referendum campaign, which politicised a large group of people who previously 
had little interest in the system. In other words I blame Brexit.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15038167> PacoReidy  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15038167> 25 November 2016 12:10pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88204326> 
"Are we too quick to blame Brexit for everything?"

"We"? 

Five months on, there's no evidence of great popular opposition to leaving the 
EU. The Lib Dems are the only major party in Eng and Wales opposing Brexit and 
their poll ratings are stuck in single figures.
 David Cameron in 2005. Remember him? Photograph: Scott Barbour/Getty Images  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14133985> apodictic  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14133985> 25 November 2016 12:17pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88204923> 
It seems to me that Cameron, Osborne, May et al are to blame. There was no 
need for a referendum. It was reckless, it was political vanity, it was 
irresponsible and without a contingency plan they are negligent. And Labour are 
to blame for (still) not providing a credible opposition and alternative 
narrative. Brexit voters are to blame for being gullible and fantasists.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13107777> imperium3  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13107777> 25 November 2016 12:08pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88204201> 
Are we too quick to blame Brexit for everything?

Yes. In fairness it's not a new trend - newspapers are always keen to blame 
long term economic trends on the most recent event.

The same bad news stories which are currently all being blamed on Brexit, 
would have all been blamed on Conservative government policies before the 
referendum, and before 2010 they would have all been blamed on the global 
financial crisis. Simple narratives are seductive, but usually wrong.
 
The autumn statement was astonishing. Nothing for the so-called Jams, the 
families who are just managing. And, maybe even more shocking, nothing at all 
for the NHS or, more specifically, for councils so they can afford to provide 
social care for older and vulnerable people –even though it is the biggest 
single cause of the NHS crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/the-guardian-view-on-the-nhs-cash-crisis-social-care-comes-first>
.


Eight charts to help you understand the autumn statement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/24/charts-autumn-statement-obr-spending-deficit-gdp>
But just when it seemed things couldn’t be worse, along came the Institute for 
Fiscal Studies’analysis of what the numbers mean for real people. The single 
most striking conclusion was that by 2021 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/ifs-warnsf-biggest-squeeze-on-pay-for-70-years-autumn-statement>
, for most families pay would only just be back at pre-2008 levels.

Meanwhile the same crew that rubbished the judges for doing their job of 
adjudicating on a legal row – also known as judging – was back on the airwaves 
yesterday heaping scorn on the IFS for doing its job of studying budgets and 
mapping their consequences. There are some senior politicians who are beginning 
to sound like the Tories’ Breitbart wing.

Or do you think they have a point? Are those of us who voted remain too quick 
to blame Brexit for everything (after all, the other EU economies are not 
exactly booming)? And is it legitimate for the 48% to keep fighting for what we 
believe in, or does there come a point when we have to get on and live with it?
 
Hello everyone. We’re looking forward to starting our weekly social, where we 
gather with readers to discuss the week’s top stories. We will have lots of 
expert comment and views from journalists above the line. If you want to talk 
about anything specific, however, let us know in the comments or by emailing: 
sarah.marsh@theguardian.com
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/17/Factsheet__Buying_a_home.txt

Buying a home can be a long and complex process, but typically it involves 
going through these steps:

Find out how much you can borrow

Call a mortgage broker to get an idea of how much you can borrow. He or she 
will be able to search the market for the best available deal and to help you 
maximise your borrowing power. You will need to give details of how much you 
earn and all of the things that you spend money on each month.

When working out how much you can afford to put down as a deposit, remember to 
keep some savings aside to meet stamp duty and other fees, and to furnish your 
new home. Get information about the different mortgages on offer, and start 
thinking about whether you want to go for a fixed or variable-rate deal.

Define your criteria

Decide what you are looking for in a property – whether you need parking and a 
garden, how many bedrooms you need, if it’s a flat, whether you want it to be 
freehold or leasehold – and pick an area on which to focus your search.

Consider what you want out of the location: are local schools, transport links 
and shops important to you? How long are you planning to live in the property 
for? Here are10 things to think about before you rush into a property purchase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/apr/10/10-things-property-market>.

Beginning the search

Start scanning the internet and local newspapers and register with estate 
agents - some properties sell before they are advertised online, so it is worth 
being on the agents’ books. If you see a property you want to look at, call the 
agent and arrange a viewing.

Bear in mind there are lots of different property websites out there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/sep/24/property-websites-alternatives-rightmove>
 you can use for your search – you don’t just have to use the big ones.

Out and about

Visit some properties. You are unlikely to find the home you want straight 
away, so don’t despair and don’t be tempted into edging over your budget if you 
don’t like the first place you look at. This is probably going to be your 
biggest financial outlay, so it is worth waiting until you find the right place.

Don’t be shy about asking questions when you are looking around a property, or 
afterwards. The estate agent should be able to provide you with basic details 
about the property, and to pass on any other queries to the people who are 
selling.

Making an offer

When you find somewhere you like, make an offer. Before you do so, try to 
glean as much information from the estate agent as possible. Ask how long it’s 
been on the market and if the seller wants a quick sale. Some websites have 
details of when a property was first listed, although this won’t tell you if 
the seller has switched to a new agent.

Many buyers initially make an offer below the asking price, and often this is 
accepted. You may want to start low and negotiate with the agent to find a 
price that satisfies both parties. But if you want to be sure you get the 
property you like – and you think it is worth the asking price – you may want 
to offer the full amount straight away.

Acceptance

If your offer is accepted, ask the estate agent to take the property off the 
market. You now need to instruct a solicitor. If you need to find a solicitor, 
ask for a few quotes and follow up personal recommendations.

Getting a mortgage

Once your offer has been accepted, call your broker or a lender to sort out 
your mortgage application. At this point you will need to provide lots of 
paperwork showing your income and outgoings.

Paperwork

Instruct your solicitor to start working on a contract. They will also send 
the seller a list of questions to answer, including a questionnaire asking 
which fixtures and fittings they intend to leave when they move out.

Surveys

Your lender should arrange a surveyor to value the property within a few days 
of agreeing the mortgage in principle. Its valuation will be very simple and 
you should arrange your own survey to get an idea of what problems there may be 
with the property.

To save money, it can sometimes be worth asking the lender’s surveyor to also 
put together a survey for you, but this is not always the case. Ask for a quote 
and compare it with quotes from other surveyors - again, ask around for 
recommendations.

The most expensive and comprehensive option is to ask the surveyor for a full 
structural survey of the building, and this is particularly worth doing if you 
are buying a property that is very old, has been extensively renovated or 
clearly needs work. It is also a good idea if you are planning to build an 
extension or structural changes to the building. However, a cheaper – albeit 
less comprehensive – homebuyer’s report should highlight any major problems and 
is a good option in other circumstances.

A good surveyor will talk to you before the survey to find out if you have any 
particular concerns and afterwards to highlight and explain any issues.

Next steps

Read the survey when it arrives. If there are a lot of problems with the 
property and you are not happy to carry on with the purchase, then act quickly 
to let everyone know, before you incur any other costs.

If you do want to pursue the purchase, but the survey advises that you get 
quotes for work that needs doing, arrange for that to be done - you will need 
to talk to the estate agent to arrange access to the property.

If a lot of work needs doing, you may want to go back to the seller and 
renegotiate on the price you are paying for the property.

Exchange of contracts

After your solicitor or conveyancer has completed all the necessary checks 
you’ll be asked to sign a contract legally committing you to the purchase. At 
this point you will need to pay a deposit for the property – usually at least 
5% of the price but more typically 10%. At this point you will usually agree a 
date to complete the sale.

Book a removal van

When you know your moving date you can start organising how to get your 
possessions to your new home. This could involve hiring a van and doing it 
yourself or hiring professional removal men. Either way, you should act fast to 
give yourself the best chance of finding a company to help when you need at a 
good price. You may also want to hireprofessional packers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2014/aug/23/moving-pay-packing> to pack 
up your belongings.

Buy buildings insurance

Your lender will expect you to have buildings insurance in place for the date 
of completion. It will quote a rebuild cost in its valuation – this is the 
amount you need to cover.

Completion

This is when the property finally becomes yours. When your solicitor tells you 
that the sale is completed you can pick the keys up from the estate agent. This 
will probably be the day that you move in, unless you are having work done in 
advance. It is likely to be a stressful day, even if everything goes according 
to plan, but should feel worthwhile after your first night in your new home.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/17/Italy_referendum_Q_A__the_big_economic_questions_answered.txt

Italians are voting in a referendum on 4 December that is causing concern 
across Europe after the UK’s vote to leave the EU and Donald Trump’s US 
presidential election victory. The votecould lead to the resignation of Matteo 
Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/after-trump-victory-italy-referendum-is-seen-as-test-of-populisms-rise>
, the prime minister. However, the fallout from a no vote on Sunday could be 
economic and financial as well as political.

Why are financial markets worried about Sunday’s referendum?

Italy’s vote is seen as the biggest threat to Europe since the UK’s referendum 
on EU membership in June <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. 
The fear is that a vote against the government could trigger a chain of events 
that might see Italy – a member of the EU since its inception – spiral out of 
the single currency.

But isn’t the referendum on a narrow political issue?

It is and it isn’t. The referendum is about constitutional changes but is also 
seen as a vote of confidence in Renzi. The proposed changes to parliament are 
part of his attempts to modernise Italy, both politically and economically. 
Markets like Renzi’s technocratic approach; they think he is needed to sort out 
the deep-seated problems of Italy’s banks – the weakest in the eurozone – and 
are worried because he haspledged to quit if the referendum is lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/matteo-renzi-repeats-vow-quit-italian-pm-loses-referendum>
.


After Trump victory, Italy referendum is seen as test of populism's rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/after-trump-victory-italy-referendum-is-seen-as-test-of-populisms-rise>
Markets fear that defeat for Renzi would trigger a general election that could 
result in power shifting to theFive Star Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/five-star-movement>. An anti-establishment 
party formed by former standup comedianBeppe Grillo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/beppe-grillo>, it has suggested it would 
call a referendum on membership of the EU.

“With a wave of elections in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in 2017, such a shift in 
sentiment would undermine political integration and increase demand for 
national sovereignty,” said analysts at Jefferies.

What’s wrong with the economy?

Pretty much everything. Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> has an 
unemployment rate of 11% and living standards have barely grown since the 
country became a founder member of the single currency 15 years ago.

Nine years after the onset of the financial crisis in 2007, output remains 8% 
down on its pre-crash level. Shweta Singh, of Lombard Street Research, said 
Italy’s weakness since the turn of the millennium was the result of three 
factors: a slow takeup of new information technology; the inability of the 
government to devalue the currency to restore competitiveness; and the 
challenge posed by China in many of the markets where Italy has traditionally 
been strong.

“Italy’s share of global exports has plummeted,” Singh said. “Since the turn 
of the century, Italy has lost more market share than most developed countries, 
including those in the euro area.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fitaly-referendum-q-and-a-economic-questions-answered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3d299c9a2dd620a8e825e08c50eb82481fca968%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italy%20referendum%20Q%26A%3A%20the%20big%20economic%20questions%20answered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fitaly-referendum-q-and-a-economic-questions-answered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italy%20referendum%20Q%26A%3A%20the%20big%20economic%20questions%20answered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fitaly-referendum-q-and-a-economic-questions-answered%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3d299c9a2dd620a8e825e08c50eb82481fca968%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Matteo Renzi campaigning for a yes vote. Photograph: Andrew Medichini/AP 
What’s wrong with the banks?

They are in “terrible shape”, according to Kathleen Brooks, research director 
at City Index. The country’s banking system is fragmented, with more branches 
than restaurants dotted across its high streets. They are weighed down by 
€360bn (£305bn) of bad debts.

The industry took too long to tackle the mountain of bad debts and by the time 
the regulators wanted action a change in EU rules meant it was difficult to set 
up a “bad bank”. Renzi is credited with helping devise a solution, creating a
backstop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/battle-prop-up-italy-banks-eu-brexit-grexit-bad-loans>
 fund – known as Atlante – for the industry.

Italy referendum: all you need to know about Renzi's crunch vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/italy-referendum-all-you-need-to-know-about-renzis-crunch-vote>
Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena, the world’s oldest bank, is also one of 
European weakest afterstress tests imposed by the European Banking Authority in 
July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/rescue-package-in-place-as-europes-oldest-bank-fails-stress-tests>
 showed its financial strength would be sapped if markets came under strain. A 
bailout plan is in train.

So what will happen if there is a no vote?

The anxiety is that the banks will crumble. Brooks said: “If [Renzi] loses the 
referendum and resigns, then the big question for traders will be if the 
bailout plan still stands. If not, then eight of Italy’s lenders could be at 
risk of collapse.

“Due to the interconnectedness of the global banking system, and the weakness 
of some other European lendersnotably Deutsche Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/27/deutsche-bank-how-did-a-beast-of-the-banking-world-get-into-this-mess>
, a collapse in Italy’s banking system could lead to intense pressure on global 
financial stocks in the aftermath of a no vote.”

Wouldn’t the European Central Bank do something? 

Almost certainly. The ECB buys €80bn of eurozone bonds each month and in the 
short term would make buying Italian bonds a priority. That might limit the 
upward movement in bond yields – the interest paid on government debt. The 
European commission would also be under pressure to soften rules that put 
restrictions on individual governments bailing out their banks.

If there is a yes vote does that mean it is a case of crisis over?

Almost certainly not. There might be a relief rally and the shares of 
Unicredit and Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena could bounce after recent 
selling, but the problems of the Italian economy and the country’s banking 
system will remain. The key issue of whether Italy can live with the pressures 
of eurozone membership will be unresolved.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/17/Polly_Toynbee_meets_Donald_Trump__the_1988_interview.txt

Headline: Towering Trump – the tycoon is big on himself and it has paid 
handsomely, but what can he do for the people?


He sits entirely still, impassive, not a muscle moving, not a wrinkle in his 
perfect appearance, his face as pressed as his suit. He mesmerises his prey 
like a snake about to strike. For underneath that stillness is a demonic power 
and energy waiting to spring.

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is New York. 
Glitz, greed, glamour and an ambition so colossal that it will probably not 
rest until he rules the world – which one day he just might. At 41 he owns vast 
chunks of Manhattan’s prime real estate, the best hotels, the biggest casinos 
in Atlantic City, huge realms in Palm Beach and much more. He is the toughest, 
the fastest, operator in the city, and probably, says his biography, the world. 
He’s as sharp as a gold-plated razor-blade.

He sells himself, like everything belonging to him, very big indeed. Now his 
autobiography is America’s bestselling book for the last five years. It has 
been number one on the bestseller list since December and his London publishers 
are reprinting already, in publication week. He boasts that other tycoons’ 
books don’t sell. ‘And I want you to know I wrote this book, I myself,’ he says.

But what of Tony Schwartz, his literary collaborator? There is something odd 
about it, for Tony Schwartz, a contributing editor atNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> Magazine, is the writer who 
wrote a great front cover expose of one of Trump’s harsher deals which involved 
the attempted winkling of tenants in a block Trump wanted to redevelop. In the 
book this incident is seen in quite another light. How did Schwartz turn 
poacher? Trump gives just the faintest hint of a shrug, not enough to disorder 
the cut of his shoulders. ‘He has a business ability,’ he explains, which has a 
ring of truth in it. ‘He catches the cadence of my voice.’

Sitting in the foyer before the interview, his high-powered PA has just told 
me that she wants me to know that: ‘Mr Trump is a genuine human being. He is a 
warm and caring person.’ He tells me too how much he does for charity. Indeed, 
he does. The whole of New York society and much of business operates around 
charity. It is the instant way in for the parvenu. What’s good about New York 
is there is no such thing as new money. Money is just money, without the need 
to launder it for a couple of generations. You don’t have to join the 
Freemasons you just buy into Dollars 10,000 a plate dinners for Cerebral Palsy 
or restoration of the Cathedral of St John the Divine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fpolly-toynbee-1988-interview-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc806248f8471fd082867ac747997a0f41ae17395%2F0_0_4487_6906%2F4487.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Polly%20Toynbee%E2%80%99s%201988%20interview%20with%20Donald%20Trump%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fpolly-toynbee-1988-interview-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Polly%20Toynbee%E2%80%99s%201988%20interview%20with%20Donald%20Trump%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fpolly-toynbee-1988-interview-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc806248f8471fd082867ac747997a0f41ae17395%2F0_0_4487_6906%2F4487.jpg>
 ‘It’s all a game. I’m young, and I’m just coming up to the best part.’ 
Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
His book, Trump: The Art Of The Deal, is a fascinating read. It is the story, 
(or more probably, a very small part of the story) of how he made it. It 
describes the deals in which he always comes out top. Even when he seems to 
lose, at the last minute he comes out the winner. It is flamboyantly exuberant 
and it offers the illusion that it’s easy. It seems to tell you how it’s done. 
It turns the entrepreneur into a modern hero, a Wild West pioneer, a 
conquistador, a Cecil Rhodes, told like the Edwardians wrote of the 
empire-builders for schoolboy hero-worshippers. There are no values but 
victory, no goals beyond winning. Trump titillates the greed nerves without 
shame or doubt.

In Britain this will be seen as a rivetting curiosity from an alien culture. 
It is exactly what we think of New York. It will satisfy our sense of moral 
superiority and old-world decency. It makes our new spirit of 
entrepreneurialism look a poor pale bloodless thing. This week it was reviewed 
by John Harvey-Jones, one of our most distinguished and successful 
industrialists. He looked down on Trump with a witty, amused, and very British 
distaste. Trump read the review with some puzzlement.

In one deal in the book, Trump describes the handshake with a real old-world 
gentleman – a handshake that cost the poor gentleman a lot of new world money. 
Harvey-Jones pulls out this incident as an emblem of Trump’s style of doing 
business.

‘I didn’t understand that,’ Trump said, aggrieved. ‘I really respected that 
honorable man. I respect a man of his word for whom a handshake is enough.’ 
But, I point out, it was his honour that did him in on this deal. ‘Look, that 
honorable man is a millionaire a hundred times over, and he’s made more money 
than your Harvey-Jones ever has, so what does he know? Your country’s distaste 
for success is a national disease.’ The whole point of the book and its 
remarkable adventures is that when each deal is struck someone loses out badly. 
‘That’s wheeling and dealing,’ he says with a faint smile.

He lives in the top three floors of Trump Tower, his first great Manhattan 
development, a magnificent mirror-glass 68-floor monument to showy flamboyance. 
It has a gigantic rose-marbled atrium and huge green trees growing up platforms 
on its facade hundreds of feet up in the sky. His wife, Ivana, is an ex-Olympic 
skier, ex-model, something of a Trump tower herself, famed for her astounding 
couture wardrobe. She runs some of his hotels and casinos with a rod of iron 
that is lovingly admired in the book. It is said that for tax purposes he gives 
her only a dollar a year, and all the dresses she can buy. Most of his book, 
and his reputation is built on the property deals he started out with. Now the 
greatest part of his wealth comes from his many casinos.

If I want to be President, then I’ll be President

So what do you do when you’re only 41 and you have made more money than you 
could ever spend? He is lionised in a city of lions. People try to touch him in 
the street, as if some of the gold might come off, the Man with the Midas Fist. 
‘What else is there?’ he asks. ‘It’s all a game. I’m young, and I’m just coming 
up to the best part.’

Maybe now, I naively suggest, he can apply his talents to solving the 
appalling problems of the city he half owns? Even as his ten million dollar 
apartments multiply, just around the corner is the West’s worst squalor, 
danger, decay and disgrace. If he’s looking for new challenges, they are all 
around him. He has, after all, just taken on the renovation of the Wollman Ice 
Skating Rink in Central Park, which had run into such catastrophic problems 
under mismanagement by the city council. He couldn’t bear to watch it out of 
his window, so he did it himself, to resounding applause and adulation. Had 
that given him a taste for taking on New York’s disaster areas?

‘Challenges?’ he said. As people always do, I had underestimated the scope of 
his ambition. It certainly wasn’t centred on solving New York’s housing crisis. 
‘I hate what’s happening to this country,’ he says, with a trace of fervour. 
‘We’re getting kicked around by the Japanese, and they’re making the United 
States look foolish. Our politicians don’t know what they’re doing. Japan is 
shaming us out of our dignity. They are buying up everything. So is Europe and 
the United States is becoming the whipping post of its allies.’ So the 
carefully placed rumours are true, Donald J Trump does want to stand for 
President? The faintest of smiles: ‘Not for a period but I am involved 
politically. You could do it from where I am.’ It is said he once said: ‘If I 
want to be President, then I’ll be President.’

Trump revealed his presidential dream to me in 1988. Now the nightmare begins 
| Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/donald-trump-interview-1988-megalomaniac>
He is beginning now to sound approximately like a politician. What would his 
platform be? ‘Respect,’ he says and pauses heavily. ‘Respect.’ He sounds like 
the Godfather. ‘We’re a second rate economic power, a debtor nation. We’re 
getting kicked around.’ I try to imagine the kind of deals he would make with 
Gorbachev, and fail. I choose an issue. What would he do about Iran, for 
instance? ‘I’d be harsh on Iran. They’ve been beating us psychologically, 
making us look a bunch of fools. One bullet shot at one of our men or ships and 
I’d do a number on Kharg Island. I’d go in and take it. Iran can’t even beat 
Iraq, yet they push the United States around. It’d be good for the world to 
take them on.’

He is enough of a politician to be polite about George Bush. He says, 
politely, that the man is not such a wimp as he’s made out. Bush has been 
unfairly traduced by the media. But he says it in a way that makes it plain 
Bush is still a wimp. Could Trump possibly make it to the White House? Of 
course not, says everyone who knows anything about American politics. It’s a 
bad joke. But then Trump has often done what can’t be done and if the White 
House can take a senile movie star, why not a casino operator?

Trump’s is not a rags to riches story. His father was a small time low-rent 
developer in Queens. But Donald Trump did not enjoy rent-collecting in areas 
where you had to stand the right side of the door in order not to get shot. But 
his father gave him the basic skills, taught him about building, and 
contractors, buying and selling. He was sent to the New York Military Academy, 
where he came out captain of the cadets of his year. He went to Wharton School 
of Finance, where he is now in the Hall of Fame, but says the degree was only 
useful in impressing people with his respectable credentials. He put together 
his first deals by sheer bravado. He had nothing, no office, a tiny shabby 
apartment, but daring and brashness of breathtaking scope, with promises and 
other people’s money.

What is he doing here in London? Certainly not promoting his book, since he 
agreed to only two interviews. Is he going to buy us up, too? ‘It’s a great 
city. It’s beginning to generate some new energy. I’m looking. If the right 
opportunity comes along, I’ll make a move.’
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/18/Can_e_bikes_revolutionise_long_distance_commuting_.txt

Every morning Dutchman Marc Dekker hops on his electric bike and cycles 40 
miles from his house in a suburb of Utrecht to his work in the town of 
Ridderkerk. And when work is done, he cycles back another 40 miles. All in all 
it takes him about three and a half hours to commute. “The actual distance is 
45km (28 miles), but I make a detour to avoid having to cross a river by 
ferry,” he says.

For years Dekker went by car to his job as a computer programmer. But early 
last year his employer called him into his office and said: I am worried about 
you. “He was right,” Dekker says. “I was continuously tired and had a short 
fuse. I drove to work very early in an attempt to avoid the rush hour and when 
I got home it was already dark. The traffic jams were killing me and I was 
never outside. Something had to change.”

It was a speed pedelec – an electric bike that can go as fast as 28mph 
(45km/h) – that brought about the change. “I love cycling,” Dekker says. “I 
always wanted to cycle to work, and I tried to do so on my racing bike, but the 
distance was simply too long. And then I tried out one of these fast electric 
bikes. Five minutes later I knew my problem was solved.”

The government of the Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> is about to reclassify such 
high-speed e-bikes as mopeds, meaning their owners will be banned from cycle 
paths, the bikes must be fitted with registration plates, and riders must wear 
helmets, obtain a driver’s licence and take out insurance. A similar situation 
already exists in Britain and many other European Union countries, with e-bikes 
limited to 15.5mph.

But for Dekker – who now cycles to work every day – his high-powered bike has 
enriched his life. “Every day I am grateful I can cycle to work. I only go by 
car when there is a storm. When it rains, I get wet. So what? At work I can 
take a hot shower and change. This has made such a change in my life. The 
stress has gone. I feel energetic when I get home, instead of tired. And the 
great thing is: I don’t have to go to the gym anymore, so it actually saves 
time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fe-bikes-long-distance-commuting-speed-pedelec-electric-cycles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbbf03195c56b61faf0ef2aab7442374504f834e%2F0_164_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20e-bikes%20revolutionise%20long-distance%20commuting%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fe-bikes-long-distance-commuting-speed-pedelec-electric-cycles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20e-bikes%20revolutionise%20long-distance%20commuting%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fe-bikes-long-distance-commuting-speed-pedelec-electric-cycles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbbf03195c56b61faf0ef2aab7442374504f834e%2F0_164_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Dekker’s e-bike commute has drastically reduced his stress levels. Photograph: 
Mona van den Berg 
Dekker is one of the growing number of Dutchmen who use electric bikes to go 
to work – although it must be said that most of them cover less impressive 
distances.


According to a Dutch survey from 2012 
<http://www.fietsberaad.nl/library/repository/bestanden/Master-thesis_ebike-for-commuter-traffic.pdf>
 the e-bike has the potential to cause a growth of 4% to 9% in the total amount 
of commuting trips by bike in the Netherlands. In some areas this could even be 
20%.


“That survey was done before the advent of the speed pedelec, so we think the 
effect will be much bigger. But we don’t have any statistics yet to account for 
it,” says Otto van Boggelen of Fietsberaad, a Dutch centre of expertise for 
cycling policy.

In the Netherlands, all kinds of initiatives have emerged to stimulate people 
to commute by e-bike. Companies, universities, local and regional authorities 
offer their employees bonuses when they come to work on an electric bike. For 
example, the region Arnhem-Nijmegen gave 650 employees who bought an e-bike a 
discount of 30%. Erasmus University Rotterdam offers a bonus of €350 (£295) to 
employees who purchase an electric bike.

“These initiatives have been quite successful,” van Boggelen says. “Generally 
you see that when people give it a try, they continue to go to work by e-bike. 
But they aren’t inveterate motorists, of course. They are usually people who 
have always wanted to cycle to work, but simply couldn’t because of the 
distance. The e-bike enables them to fulfil this wish.”

The great thing is, you can choose how fast you want to pedal and you don’t 
arrive sweaty at work
Otto van Boggelen 
Commuting <https://www.theguardian.com/cities/commuting> by e-bike offers many 
advantages to all parties, he says. “It enables employers to economise on 
parking places and improves the health of their workforce. Authorities see it 
as a tool to minimise traffic jams and CO2 emissions. To the commuters it 
offers exercise and fresh air. And they save on petrol costs.”

The e-bike has also saved many Dutch bike shops. The sale of regular bikes is 
declining in the Netherlands, but shops still make a profit out of thegrowing 
number of expensive e-bikes they sell 
<http://bovagrai.info/tweewieler/2015/media/Mobiliteit-in-Cijfers-Tweewielers-2015-webversie.pdf>
.

For some time the e-bike suffered from a dowdy image, because in the beginning 
they were mainly bought by elderly people. But the new generation of fast 
electric bikes or speed pedelecs are no longer considered a means of transport 
for the older generation. Thenumber of young people buying them 
<https://www.rabobankcijfersentrends.nl/index.cfm?action=print&branche=Tweewielerspeciaalzaken>
 is growing fast.


According to van Boggelen, the speed pedelec is attractive because “you can 
still experience the bike-feeling” while moving as fast as a moped. “The great 
thing is, you can choose how fast you want to pedal and you don’t arrive sweaty 
at work.” He thinks the e-bike could also offer possibilities for commuting in 
other countries. “In hilly areas these bikes are really helpful. But you do 
need a safe cycling infrastructure.”

E-bikes also pose problems. They are expensive and can be prone to theft. The 
Dutch police have recently announced they are going to deploy decoy e-bikes to 
track down gangs of professional bicycle thieves.

Bike jams and unwritten rules: a day with Amsterdam's new 'bicycle mayor'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/11/cycling-amsterdam-bike-jams-bicycle-mayor-anna-luten>
And then there is the question of safety. Until now, speed pedelecs have been 
allowed to use the extensive Dutch network of cycle paths, provided they don’t 
go faster than 15.5mph. From January 2017, though, the Dutch government will 
put speed pedelecs on the same footing as mopeds.


That is already the position in most other EU countries, including the UK, 
where speed pedelecs must be registered as mopeds with the DVLA, taxed and 
insured. Riders are supposed to wear motorcycle-style helmets – but few do. A
recent investigation by the Sunday Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/28mph-ebikes-speed-past-legal-limit-tlrhj5t0n>
 found evidence of London commuters using high-powered e-bikes and retailers 
selling them without making clear that unregistered bikes should only be used 
on private land.

“Safety risks hardly increase when you use a regular e-bike, but risks are 
certainly higher when we’re talking about speed pedelecs,” says Wim Bot of the 
Dutch Cyclists Union. “So for the safety of other cyclists, we don’t want 
people on power bikes to use cycle paths in the city. We do think these bikes 
are a great alternative for the car when it comes to commuting though.”

Marc Dekker agrees: “If it wasn’t for my speed pedelec, I would have never 
decided to go to work on a bike.”


Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/18/FTSE_up_nearly_2__with_Merlin_higher_but_travel_shares_down_after_Istanbul.txt

The post-Brexit bounce is continuing in stock markets as investors continue to 
snap up what they see as bargain-basement shares.

With the UK unlikely to trigger Article 50 - which sets the clock ticking on 
the country’s departure from the European Union - in the immediate future, 
markets are taking stock of the situation. But despite a calmer tone at the 
moment, volatile moves are still likely for some while, even if they are 
upwards rather than falling. Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at 
stockbroker Interactive Investor, said:

Investors, who are still trying to work out whether current market levels pose 
and opportunity or a threat, are coming down firmly on the side of opportunity 
with equities across the UK and Europe up strongly for a second day. With 
global central banks all trying to reassure markets, prices are stabilising and 
volatility is falling. However, it is still very early in the process and 
significant political and market risks remain, so we may start to see some 
investors start to sell the rally, which could see markets pare back some of 
the gains.

At the moment the FTSE 100 is up 104.37 points or 1.7% at 6244.76, within 100 
points of where it stood before the referendum result unleashed chaos. The FTSE 
250, which is more closely aligned with the UK domestic market, is up 1.52% 
after its near 14% decline immediately after the vote.

Financial shares, which have borne the brunt of recent selling, are among the 
main risers despite downgrades from Moody’s ratings agency.Barclays is 4.3p 
better at 135.8p while Prudential has put on 60.5p to £12.51.

Housebuilders are also in demand, with Taylor Wimpey up 4p at 126p.

Merlin Entertainments, operator of Alton Towers and Legoland, is 2.6% higher 
at 425.8p after analysts at JP Morgan moved from underweight to neutral and 
raised their price target to 464p. The bank said:

We forecast a full year 2015 to 2018 estimated earnings per share compound 
annual growth rate of 17.4% (but only 9.3% adjusting for the Alton Towers base 
effect). This is driven by4.3% like for like sales growth and 7 new Midway 
sites per year, as well as Legoland Japan and Legoland Korea (due to open by 
2018) and accommodation rollout across the estate. Merlin’s 2017 estimated 
valuation has come down to 16 times/4.7% free cashflow yield, compared to 
European hotel stocks on 14.9 times/2.3% and Whitbread on 13 times / -1.5%.

If Merlin were to accelerate the Midway rollout, open a new owned/leased 
Legoland or conduct further bolt-on M&A, there could be upside to our 
forecasts. But this looks unlikely, in our view, before our 2017 estimated 
“peak” capex forecast of £271m (17% of sales, 1.9 times depreciation)

But tourism-related shares have fallen after the attacks at Istanbul airport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/turkey-airport-explosions-ataturak-istanbul>
, withTui down 33p at 845p and British Airways owner International Airlines 
Group10.9p lower at 346.3p.

Dixons Carphone is down 9.5p at 332.5p on uncertainty on the outlook 
post-Brexit despitea 17% rise in full year profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/29/dixons-carphone-annual-profits-rise-telecoms-industry>
.

Among the mid-caps Electrocomponents has fallen 13.4p to 247.8p after Credit 
Suisse cut from neutral to underperform with a 220p target price, down from 
265p. It said:

Following the UK referendum result and Datwyler’s acquisition of Premier 
Farnell we re-visit our estimates for organic growth and margin improvement. 
With Credit Suisse economists forecasting a shallow recession in the UK in the 
second half of 2016 and a Euro area slowdown we moderate our organic growth 
forecasts which now average 2.1% across 2017 to 2021 (from 2.9%). The foreign 
exchange movements which have followed the Brexit vote provide revenue 
benefits, however as a net buyer of dollar denominated COGS [cost of goods 
sold],Electrocomponents <https://www.theguardian.com/business/electrocomponents>
 are exposed at the gross margin level by a weakening in the pound.

Consolidation in the market place not involving Electrocomponents was 
highlighted as a risk to our recommendation in our April 2016 note and 
following Datwyler’s 165p cash offer for Premier Farnell we believe 
Electrocomponents is likely to experience incremental competitive pricing 
pressures, especially in Europe where operations overlap. We reduce our EBITA 
estimates by around 60 basis points per annum across the forecast period with 
the gross profit margin decreasing from prior estimated by 90 basis points to 
2021. The company continues to execute well its business improvement strategy, 
increasing the growth of own label products and over-delivering against cost 
reduction targets. However, the stock currently trades at a 50% premium to its 
2009 two year forward PE multiple and whilst we are not forecasting a global 
recession and recognise current management’s positive impact, in our view there 
is room for a pronounced de-rating.

Elsewhere technology group Qinetiq is down 9.7p to 213.4p after a downgrade 
from JP Morgan and news that finance director David Mellors was stepping down 
at the end of December to joinCobham, up 6.3p at 156.7p. 

Distribution group Brammer has slumped 54% to 65.75p after warning half year 
profits would be below expectations at around £5m and said it would be close to 
its net debt/earnings bank covenant at the end of the period.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/18/Guns_N__Roses___Rock_n_roll_is_like_an_aphrodisiac_for_people_who_have__everyday_jobs_.txt

If you don’t know better, you’ll swear that Guns N’ Roses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/18/guns-n-roses-feature-film-marc-canter>
 are just another band from that LA metal scene, trying to be the newest and 
sleaziest party badasses on the block, hoping eventually to form a corporation 
so they can buy shopping malls and stuff — and not knowing a decent rock n’ 
roll riff if it comes and hits them in the face.


 Before I moved to LA, over a year ago, the hype machine had already been 
running full-throttle for Guns N’ Roses, and although I couldn’t have told you 
anything about the band’s music at the time, it wasn’t hard to figure out that 
the cover of their debut LP,Appetite for Destruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/sep/20/appetite-destruction-guns-roses>
, had managed to offend lots of people with its rape imagery (so much so that 
Geffen released a second cover).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fguns-n-roses-interview-appetite-destruction-1988-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437562239565%2F34425c6b-9cd6-46f1-9aa5-ae1faeee2bcc-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guns%20N'%20Roses%3A%20'Rock%E2%80%99n%E2%80%99roll%20is%20like%20an%20aphrodisiac%20for%20people%20who%20have%20everyday%20jobs'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fguns-n-roses-interview-appetite-destruction-1988-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guns%20N%27%20Roses%3A%20%27Rock%E2%80%99n%E2%80%99roll%20is%20like%20an%20aphrodisiac%20for%20people%20who%20have%20everyday%20jobs%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fguns-n-roses-interview-appetite-destruction-1988-spin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437562239565%2F34425c6b-9cd6-46f1-9aa5-ae1faeee2bcc-2060x2060.jpeg>
 Guns N’ Roses’ banned album cover 
 Of course, word was filtering up from the street about them as well. When the 
band played a huge benefit concert with an all-star heavy metal ensemble 
dubbed: “The Party Ninjas”, they reportedly blew everyone else off the stage. 
When Alice Cooper recently played in Long Beach, three members of GN’R joined 
him onstage for the encore,Under My Wheels 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VHMNBf-szKs>, which was said to be the only 
real highlight of the entire show. (Cooper subsequently took the band into the 
studio to re-record the song.) Of course, none of this may sound like any big 
deal, considering the competition, but then I ran into this guy I know who was 
leaving a party early so he could see Guns N’ Roses play.

 “I didn’t know you liked heavy metal,” I said. (I mean, this guy’s favourite 
band of all time isMission of Burma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/05/mission-of-burma-unsound-review>
). “Guns N’ Roses aren’t heavy metal,” he replied. “Believe me, they aren’t.”

 And you know something? He was right. Oh, sure, Appetite for Destruction 
seems socially irresponsible, sexist, and totally reprehensible at times. But 
you know what else? The music is great. These guys wear their influences on 
their sleeves like a banner – and all the influences are obviously there, not 
just Aerosmith, Led Zep, early Alice Cooper, andBlack Sabbath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/24/black-sabbath-announces-farewell-concert>
, but also the Dolls, Stones,Ramones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2014/apr/30/ramones-at-40-punk-in-pictures>
, Cheap Trick, Iggy and the Pistols, as well as Bo Diddley, whose classic riff 
creates GN’R’s Mr Brownstone. These guys have been known to dust off Heartbreak 
Hotel or Jumpin’ Jack Flash for live performances. The dual lead guitars of 
Slash and Izzy Stradlin are much more interested in playing melodies and 
rock’n’roll riffs than demonstrating their Eddie Van Halenisms — and they’re 
both pretty incredible as a result. The rhythm team of bassistDuff McKagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/06/guns-n-roses-duff-mckagan-publish-book-how-to-be-a-man>
 and drummer Steven Adler has obviously listened to stuff like the MC5 
somewhere along the way. And lead singer/band focal point W Axl Rose —Axl, for 
short <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/jan/03/popandrock.artsfeatures>— 
is a man of more voices than any hard-rock singer in recent memory. This is a 
record that may actually make you want to play air guitar again.

 Something else is different about Guns N’ Roses. Although their songs are 
about the decadence one associates with Hollywood, there also seems to be a 
strange, moralistic overtone to some of them. Or at least a song like Welcome 
to the Jungle reflects what the porno scene around the newsstand I frequent 
really feels like more than any song I can think of.

Guns N’ Roses seem to be writing about the things they see in the city, but 
they don’t necessarily glamourise. Mr Brownstone can be interpreted as much an 
anti-heroin song as it can be pro, and, hell, you can say the same thing about 
the Velvet’s Underground’s Heroin. Even the excesses that are celebrated in 
It’s So Easy seem to be delivered with a passive indifference. A steady diet of 
decadence can get pretty boring, or worse. And lyrics like “Take me down to 
Paradise City, where the grass is green and girls are pretty” aren’t exactly 
your standard celebration of sleaze, while some of Axl’s love songs (Sweet 
Child O’ Mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/may/14/australian-crawl-singer-james-reyne-similarities-between-sweet-child-o-mine>
, Rocket Queen) reveal a beating heart beneath the hardcore exterior. And 
besides, if they really are a bunch of scumbags … well, we didn’t stop 
listening to Paint It, Black just because Keith Richards stuck spikes in his 
veins.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do1tj2zJ2Wvg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do1tj2zJ2Wvg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do1tj2zJ2Wvg&media=>
What am I going to do? Get the bassist from Van Halen strung out on something? 
We’re just a bunch of kids, you know.
Slash 
 Still, there is this image and reputation that have to be dealt with. People 
at Warner Brothers, the band’s parent label, wrote them nasty letters about the 
offensive album cover. These guys even have a bad reputation among their peers, 
and can’t get on certain tours as a result. AC/DC did offer them an opening 
slot, but wanted to hold their pay as security for three weeks, and then 
planned to kick them off the tour at the end of the grace period; they declined 
the offer. The organisers of this summer’s forthcoming Monsters of Rock 
extravaganza (featuring Van Halen, Judas Priest, Metallica, etc.) wouldn’t have 
any part of Guns. “I mean, what am I going to do?” asks guitarist Slash, whose 
eyes make only rare appearances from beneath his Joey Ramone-like bush of hair. 
“Get the bassist from Van Halen or Judas Priest strung out on something? We’re 
just a bunch of kids, you know.”

 Three of these kids – Slash, lzzy,and Duff – are sitting in a quiet Mexican 
restaurant on Sunset Boulevard, conversing with an older dude who likes their 
music but doesn’t understand their image. (Axl, maintaining his mysterious 
veneer, isn’t here for this session, though he has promised to call later.) 
They’ve been in and out of bands since age 14, which was approximately 10 years 
ago. None of them are originally from LA, though Slash moved here from England 
with his parents years ago. Axl and Izzy both migrated from Indiana, while Duff 
hails from Seattle.

The band formed to play a $50 gig in that latter city three years ago – after 
hitchhiking across the desert subsequent to their car breaking down – and 
carried on from that point. A year later they were signed, and, lacking a 
manager, proceeded to negotiate their own contract, a most uncommon occurrence 
in this biz. They claim to be a real band in that they’re all the best of 
friends, create everything together as a joint effort, and really concentrate 
on their music. And — I hate to blow any illusions here, but – they’re nice 
guys (“You’re not going to print that, are you?” one of their publicists asked 
the morning after) … or at least they’re putting on a hell of an act for me. 
Sure, they like to drink a lot, but then so do theReplacements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/21/the-replacements-thirty-years-later-interview>
 and Dean Martin.

 So why the “bad boys” rap?

 “I don’t know,” says Slash. “Because we drink and do whatever, and we’re just 
basically real people to the point that I think it almost offends other people.”

 “I’m immediately embarrassed when that image comes up,” says Duff. “A lot of 
bands go: ‘Good, we got the bad-boy title this week,’ but with us, it’s like 
we’re just a rock’n’roll band. A lot of things go along with that that we take 
full advantage of at times. We were doing all that stuff before we were in the 
band, though. We didn’t try to create any kind of image. It was created for us. 
Decadence was laid on this band.”
 Appetite For Destruction – full stream 
 “Well, some of those early parties were pretty brash,” laughs Izzy.

 “You’ve heard some of those old Stones stories, right?” asks Slash. “It was 
sort of the epitome of that. The thing is, we don’t take shit from people, and 
we’ve never conformed to anybody else’s standards, and most of the people we 
had to deal with at the time, we’d tell, ‘Fuck you.’ So it was like ‘Oh, my 
God!’”

 “But it wasn’t a bratty thing,” Duff explains. “It’s just what we were used 
to, but the industry and record company weren’t.”

 “If I remember correctly, they wanted to drop us at one point,” says Izzy. 
“About a year after they signed us.”

 Slash: “Well, what happened is, we got restless. We get signed, they give us 
a bunch of money, put us in an apartment, we can’t go out and do any gigs – so 
we fucking got bored, and started doing a lot of drugs, drinking a lot, tearing 
up houses. We had $7,500 apiece – which was unheard of for us.”

 Izzy: “We partied hard for about two weeks.”

 Slash: “And just about every single manager that we met was scared shitless 
of us. And it was bad. We couldn’t help it. We were bored. So we started to 
fuck up. But we finally got it together and gave them what they wanted.”

 Izzy: “So now they all love us.”

 What about the rape charges?

 Slash: “That was no big deal. What happened is Axl and me were with these two 
girls, and they got in a sexual situation and they decided to file rape 
charges. Me and Axl had to borrow suits one day to go down to the police 
station and turn ourselves in over this crap – and when it came down to the 
wire, they dropped the charges because it was all bogus. We didn’t fucking do 
anything to them.”

 Izzy: “It turned out that our drummer had fucked one of their mothers, so it 
was a complicated story.”

 Do they feel an association with the metal scene?

 Izzy: “We have metal guitar strings. That’s the only similarity we have.”

The next generation of rock’n’roll is going to be a bunch of morons, because 
these bands aren’t doing anything with it
Slash 
 Slash: “It’s like this new cliche to say, ‘We’re not a heavy metal band. 
We’re a rock’n’roll band.’ Poison and everyone are saying it, so I can’t even 
say that any more. But the truth of the matter is when rock’n’roll was young 
and stuff, the bands were real, the people were real and sincere – the only 
thing that was fucked up was the business itself. But now to sell, bands 
conform to what the record company wants, and the magazines are conforming to 
what’s selling, so they get together to create like this whole bullshit fad. I 
mean, you look at it, and just go, ‘Fuck, it’s so unreal.’ I mean, obviously 
we’re a product of what we’ve grown up with, regardless of what it is. But it’s 
scary because the next generation of rock’n’roll – it’s already getting to be 
this way – is going to be a bunch of morons, because these bands aren’t doing 
anything with it that’s interesting or even educational on a rock’n’roll level. 
It’s all garbage.

 “I mean, you can’t be a rock ‘n’ roll band, and only have your roots go back 
five years. What the fuck is that? As a result, now we have bands like Kingdom 
Come, and their Led Zeppelin … ”

 Izzy: “… regurgitation.”

 The most ironic thing about this interview is that these guys ended up being 
really likeable, Johnny Thunders fetishes and all. They’re passionate about 
certain music that I once felt that way about, and they’re awfully non-jaded 
for all their worldliness. And all indications pointed to them being incredible 
assholes.

 Duff: “What sticks in the back of my head most of the time when I do 
interviews is why would anybody want to know about me and what ticks inside my 
head. I don’t understand that because it’s just a rock’n’roll band. We’re just 
playing.”

 Slash: “In the general scheme of things, us and other bands are pretty 
insignificant when you look at the rest of the world. And for bands to think 
that they’re the centre of the universe just makes me sick. Basically, 
rock’n’roll is like an aphrodisiac for people who have everyday jobs and shit, 
and their one stab at total freedom and anarchy and whatever is to listen to 
rock’n’roll. But if we faded out tomorrow and Guns N’ Roses faded out tomorrow, 
no one’s really going to give a shit [everyone laughs].”

 Duff: “Also, it’s like we’ve played some big places, and all the people are 
going nuts, and we’ll look at each other, and it’s like, ‘What is this all 
about?’ And then doing interviews and stuff, people will get really serious and 
in your face – so you’ll get back in their face, ‘Why would you want to know 
this? This is ridiculous.’ And maybe it’s a band that’s different than the ones 
that have come along in awhile, which I think we are. But, then again, to get 
so into it, and to think that you’re … ”

 Izzy: “… it … ”

 Duff: “… and something like the Persian Gulf doesn’t matter … ”

 As I said, very likeable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fguns-n-roses-interview-appetite-destruction-1988-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437564194185%2F853d5d84-5fb9-4f7c-821e-e7f4b5a71e1f-2060x1376.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guns%20N'%20Roses%3A%20'Rock%E2%80%99n%E2%80%99roll%20is%20like%20an%20aphrodisiac%20for%20people%20who%20have%20everyday%20jobs'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fguns-n-roses-interview-appetite-destruction-1988-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guns%20N%27%20Roses%3A%20%27Rock%E2%80%99n%E2%80%99roll%20is%20like%20an%20aphrodisiac%20for%20people%20who%20have%20everyday%20jobs%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fguns-n-roses-interview-appetite-destruction-1988-spin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437564194185%2F853d5d84-5fb9-4f7c-821e-e7f4b5a71e1f-2060x1376.jpeg>
 (L-R) Izzy Stradlin, Duff McKagan, Axl Rose, Slash and Steven Adler. 
Photograph: Marc S Canter/Getty Images 
A PHONE CALL FROM AXL:

So, I’m told you’re out of control.

 “Me? Well, out of their control, maybe.”

Do you think the record company has you manufacturing rebellion?

 “It’s kind of weird, because we are just being ourselves, but at the same 
time, these ‘bad boy’ images tend to sell. So it’s being capitalised on, and I 
think the industry may not know how to deal with it because they’ve been 
dealing with bands as a package for years. But then there are bands that 
profess some type of image that they live and lead, but it’s not something that 
they actually do. They’re more apt to stay home. I stay home a lot just so I 
don’t go out and get on a roll that I don’t want to necessarily lead me to 
wherever it may.”

Heavy metal?

 “We like a lot of forms of music. What came out on that record are songs 
we’ve written that we’ve had the most fun with. We don’t consider it heavy 
metal, but hard rock. We recently did two shows in Anaheim in which we did some 
country-type stuff, and it went over really well. We’ve got acoustic stuff 
ready for the next record, and I think we’ll have a pretty broad range of stuff 
to give the public — but it won’t be lacking the loud guitars because that’s 
something I’m a fan of. Right now, like my favourite songs are Man in the 
Mirror by Michael Jackson and Fab by George Harrison – so I try to stay open to 
all kinds of stuff. It’s not cool in the rock’n’roll world to like George 
Michael, but he’s done some great stuff on this last record.”

 On It’s So Easy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UOqDCSRNgj4>:

 “It is. If you want to like disappear for a while, and then get back into the 
scene a little bit, you’re back in the first night out, whether you want to be 
or not. It’s already there – 200 people in your face with this and that. ‘Come 
and do some blow, I’ve got some heroin … ’ You can choose to do it, and if you 
don’t, it’s kind of weird. But it can get a little depressing.”

 On responsibility:

 “It kind of surprised me to see so many kids coming to the show. Nothing 
against kids, but we didn’t write our songs with anyone in mind really other 
than the people we were writing them about and the Hollywood scene. And in 
Hollywood, most of the clubs were 21 and over, so we weren’t really writing for 
the younger kids. I’m not encouraging a 13-year-old kid to go and do drugs. 
We’re just writing about something that happened in our life. It’s strange 
that’s who comes to the concerts and stuff, and I wonder where all the older 
people are, but, then again, they go to Bruce Springsteen concerts because I’m 
not writing about the things he writes about. I’m not writing about having a 
job in the midwest and stuff.”

 Other fab facts: 

He writes about “things that really happened”; his steady girlfriend (the 
subject of Sweet Child O’ Mine) is famed brother Don Everly’s daughter; he 
plays piano; and he started singing in church at the age of five but never 
wanted to be a singer because he didn’t like his voice.

 And the notorious album cover? “It was a postcard called Appetite for 
Destruction I found and submitted as a joke, and the other guys liked it. I’d 
originally seen it in a book, and I liked the artwork because I’m a fan of 
those underground, strange, X-rated comics. And it got turned into us condoning 
rape and stuff.”

 “I can’t believe everyone made such a big deal out of a postcard,” says Izzy.

 Slash cons me into driving him and his girlfriend home (he actually lives in 
a TraveLodge motel) to Hermosa Beach. He tells me that, being naive at first to 
celebrity status (“We used to have to look for drugs, now people force them on 
us”), he eventually had to move outside of Hollywood just to keep things under 
control. He gets me lost on the California freeways for over two hours. “I’m 
really sorry, man. I’m always wasted when I leave Hollywood, so I forget.” We 
both agree that almost every song on the heavy metal station that’s playing 
sounds alike, and that Judas Priest’s Johnny B Goode doesn’t sound anything 
like Chuck Berry.

 © Bill Holdship, 1988
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/18/Why_I_was_wrong_on_house_prices_in_2016___and_why_I_might_still_be_proved__right.txt

Australian house prices rose at a solid pace in 2016, defying many 
expectations for moderate price falls –including mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/04/economists-predicted-house-prices-would-stabilise-in-2016-but-the-opposite-happened>
.

It seems the error of my forecast was to misread the policy approach to 
regulatory restrictions on investor lending which, as it turned out, was limp 
and ineffectual.

For years, smart people have been arguing for a tightening in prudential 
controls on lending to cool the housing market. The people who regulate the 
mortgage market have, however, taken only baby steps to address the issue and 
have failed to cool it. Investor loans have been roaring along since the middle 
of 2016.

Economists predicted house prices would stabilise in 2016, but the opposite 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/04/economists-predicted-house-prices-would-stabilise-in-2016-but-the-opposite-happened>
Another important factor behind the resilience in house price growth was the 
shock interest rate cuts from theReserve Bank of Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/reserve-bank-of-australia> during 
2016 as it reacted to the surprising slump in inflation and wages growth. These 
low interest rates fuelled extra borrowing capacity, some of which fed into 
house prices.

Oversupply from the apartment construction boom, which I also thought would 
start to bite in 2016, looks to be more of an issue for 2017 even though 
apartment prices fell in most major cities in the latter part of 2016. Prices 
for freestanding houses were particularly strong.

No sensible observer of the Australian housing market believes the regulators 
have it “right” when it comes to conditions attached to investor lending. Just 
about anyone with a few assets and a half decent income can get a loan for 
investment purposes despite the pretence of “tighter” lending conditions. The 
negative gearing rules only add to such demand.

While that remains the case and while there is strong demand relative to the 
growth in housing supply, price pressures will be skewed to the upside.

With 2016 behind us, there are grounds to think that 2017 could be the year of 
the great house price moderation. While the Reserve Bank appears to have 
official interest rates on hold, the sharp jump in bond yields over the past 
few months is feeding into bank funding costs. This higher cost of funds has 
already filtered through to higher fixed-mortgage interest rates which, 
unchecked, will erode housing demand.

Also acting as a likely dampener for demand is the sponginess in the labour 
market, with wages growth hovering at record lows, full-time employment 
sluggish and the unemployment rate high. Potential purchasers of dwellings, 
already constrained by high levels of debt, have only limited ability to add to 
their leverage, at least in the near term.

And then there is dwelling supply. Building approvals reached record levels in 
2016 and, once those approvals turn into finished dwellings ready for 
owner-occupiers or renters to move into, there is likely to be excess supply in 
several major cities. This will, at least in the short to medium term, 
undermine prices.

Coalition policy has gone badly wrong and the RBA needs to cut interest rates 
| Stephen Koukoulas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/coalition-policy-has-gone-badly-wrong-and-the-rba-needs-to-cut-interest-rates>
While supply and demand remain the dominant long-run drivers of house prices, 
interest rate changes, macroeconomic conditions and prudential changes can all 
have a short-term impact.

The supply and demand dynamics are pointing to a moderation in house prices, 
as are changes to interest rates and what looks to be a soft economy with a 
weak labour market. 2017 is set to be the year of weaker house price growth, 
perhaps even price falls.

If the moderation is orderly, without much in the way of forced selling, it 
will actually be good news for the economy. Some prudential risks will ease, 
affordability will further improve and the housing market will move towards 
balance.

The government and regulators could help to lock this in if they are bold 
enough to tighten lending and tax rules to reduce some of the investor demand 
which has, in recent times at least, distorted the market.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/19/A_data_strategy_could_help_independent_retailers_to_thrive.txt

Paprika Gifts is an independent retail store based in the Wiltshire market 
town of Chippenham. Located in the Borough Parade shopping centre just off the 
high street, it rubs shoulders with some well-known retail brands – Waitrose, 
Argos, The Body Shop, WHSmith and Boots to name a few. For owner Anne Anderson, 
who has a second smaller store on Chelsea Road in nearby Bath, this represents 
both a challenge and an opportunity.


While all these chains are classed as competitors they also bring footfall, 
but she doesn’t know how much because the data is not released by the centre 
management. Anderson understands that the names bring in the shoppers but she 
also sees the “hundreds of boxes” delivered to Waitrose as part of the John 
Lewis click and collect online scheme.

“There is competition everywhere. All the major stores bring out Christmas 
gift ranges,” Anderson says, adding that it is her and her staff’s intuition 
for products and local knowledge of customers that enables the business to 
succeed. There is no data, no analytics, just good old-fashioned smelling 
what’s selling, as Lord Sugar would put it.

Utilising big data 

In contrast, the large retailers are increasingly driven by big data – 
information harvested from a mix of product sales receipts, online browsing 
records, loyalty cards, open data, location-based data and, of course, social 
media data. This data is helping to drive decision making – where to locate a 
new store, which products to stock, how to market to different age groups and 
so on.

“The more we know about our customers – the way they shop and when, their 
preferred methods of communication, their buying patterns and habits – the more 
that allows us to tailor our client proposition,” Andrew Ware, chief financial 
offer at Keyhaven Capital, said in an Economist Intelligence Unitstudy 
<http://www.wipro.com/documents/the-big-data-revolution-in-retail.pdf> by 
consultancy firm Wipro.

The study is revealing: 54% of retailers said big data had brought gains in 
multichannel sales, and 62% said they would make further investments in big 
data analytics in the next two years. Of course it makes sense if you are a 
retailer and can afford it or even find the required skills in the market. 
Retail data analysts are in demand and can command salaries from £30-75k and 
above, according to James Milligan, director of Hays Digital Technology.

So what does this get you? The John Lewis retail report 
<http://johnlewis.scene7.com/is/content/JohnLewis/jl_retail_report_2015_151015pdf>
, a detailed analysis of customer habits, best-selling products and fashion 
trends is a good example of what customer data can do for a retailer with all 
the right data tools in place. So are smaller independents missing out? Can 
they get access to data or is the accepted pattern an ever-widening gulf 
between large chains and independents?

Emile Naus, partner and technical director at supply chain and operations 
specialist LCP Consulting, says there are advantages to big data but equally 
pitfalls. Data, he says, is a starting point and needs meaning to enable 
decision making.

“Over the last few years large retailers have invested heavily in big data 
with varied results,” he says. “There is a risk of over reliance. Retailers can 
get boring. Local retailers have an advantage in that they have to be more 
creative. They should play to their strengths.”

Tapping into local knowledge 

Naus adds that if smaller independent retailers get the data bit right, they 
could in fact put themselves in a strong position by combining it with their 
local knowledge. Clare Bailey, retail expert and chair of The Retail 
Conference, agrees.

“Large retailers are at risk of losing the local detail through data 
aggregation,” says Bailey, adding that small independents “don’t need big data 
they just need data”. Combine this data with local expertise and you have a 
tasty recipe for success, well at least the potential for an advantage over the 
bigger retailers.

“At the top end of the independent market, those that are doing really well 
are investing in EPOS systems, for example, that provide data and reporting,” 
says Bailey. “Most of the independents, though, are just getting by so they 
need to embrace technology.”

Bailey is right, of course. It’s something Anderson at Paprika Gifts is well 
aware of as she embarks on a major website upgrade and digital marketing and 
data strategy. But Anderson is typical, not just of independent retailers but 
small business owners when she says finding time is the biggest challenge.

It’s something that hasn’t escaped the attention of software providers. While 
IBM and SAP have already released “lite” versions of data software for small 
retailers, specialist startups such as Statement Retail are gaining traction.

Investing time and money innovating

“I think data analysis is a big challenge for small retailers,” says Dan 
Conboy, managing director at digital retail firm Statement Retail. “This is 
partly because many smaller independents don’t have any EPOS solutions in place 
and have often not embraced the multichannel world where consumers like to 
browse before they visit a store. We often find that smaller independents say 
they haven’t innovated in this way because they perceive it to be complex, 
expensive or they don’t have time.”

Statement Retail, adds Conboy, aims to change this. It has partnered with 
Shopify, a global e-commerce platform, opening up the possibility for data 
analytics, regardless of size of business.

“This can transform a small retail business because they can easily see what 
is and isn’t selling, thereby having the knowledge to improve both their sales 
and cash flow,” adds Conboy. “In today’s volatile and fast-paced retail 
landscape, having this level of intelligence can be critical to the business 
success for an independent retailer.”

Certainly the future is a challenging one for any retailer. Figures 
<http://blog.localdatacompany.com/infographic-in-the-balance-h1-2016-retail-and-leisure-report>
 from retail data firm the Local Data Company recently revealed that shop 
closures are currently outstripping shop openings and as a result, high-street 
vacancy rates are up for the first time since 2012.

The figures suggest Brexit is having an impact but as we head towards the 
Christmas shopping period, may be this will change, at least for the short 
term. For the longer term, technology – or more specifically data – will 
increasingly drive change so the figures will continue to fluctuate and with 
them hopefully, so will the fortunes of our independent high-street shops.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Brought to you by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2016/jan/25/content-funding>.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/19/Juncker_puts_veteran_French_politician_in_charge_of_Brexit_talks.txt

A veteran French politician and experienced Brussels insider who has 
repeatedly clashed with the City of London over financial services reforms is 
to lead talks on Britain’s exit from the EU.

The president of the European commission, Jean-Claude Juncker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jean-claude-juncker>, said he had wanted an 
experienced politician for an “important and challenging job” as he announced 
the appointment of Michel Barnier, a former EU commissioner. Barnier would 
“help us develop a new partnership with the UK”, he said.

A member of France’s centre-right Les Républicains (formerly UMP) party, 
Barnier, a former French cabinet minister, will take up his post on 1 October. 
He said in a tweet he was “honoured to be entrusted” with such a demanding 
task. The appointment will be viewed with some apprehension in London.
Michel Barnier (@MichelBarnier) 
honoured to be entrusted UK negotiation by @JunckerEU 
<https://twitter.com/JunckerEU> and @EU_Commission 
<https://twitter.com/EU_Commission>. Rendez-vous for beginning of demanding 
task on 1 October.
 <https://twitter.com/MichelBarnier/status/758222998948241408> July 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MichelBarnier/status/758222998948241408> 
As internal markets and services commissioner from 2010 to 2014, Barnier was 
in charge of the key financial services portfolio, leading the bloc’s attempts 
to contain the eurozone debt crisis and establish its new banking union.

He oversaw more than 40 different laws aimed at tightening banking and market 
regulations on activities such as short selling, clashing repeatedly with 
bankers and the British government over the EU’s planned cap on City bonuses.

Barnier threatened “a coordinated response” from Brussels against banks that 
sought to dodge the cap by paying top staff extra allowances after Britain, 
outvoted 26 to one in Brussels on the proposal, launched a legal challenge at 
the European court of justice in 2013.

Can the EU persuade the UK to change its mind on Brexit?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/27/brexit-can-the-eu-persuade-the-uk-to-change-its-mind>
Nick Clegg, the former deputy prime minister and now Liberal Democrat Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> spokesman, said the appointment 
“will set alarm bells ringing in the City of London”, adding that he doubted 
Barnier would be eager to protect the City’s passporting rights to operate in 
the eurozone.

A Downing street spokesperson said: “We’ve said it’s important that both sides 
prepare for the negotiations. We look forward to working with representatives 
from the member states, the council and the commission to ensure an orderly 
departure of the UK from the EU.”

Officials have suggested that they expect the key negotiations to take place 
at the council level, meaning that they see the most important figures as the 
president, Donald Tusk, and the leaders of other European countries.

May has started her premiership with a concerted effort to reach out to her 
counterparts across the EU, with trips to Poland and Slovakia on Thursday, 
following visits to Germany, France and Italy, with migration expected to be a 
key area of discussion.

Sources said the trips represented ongoing engagement with other leaders, with 
a desire to show that she would reach out into eastern Europe as well, 
acknowledging the Slovaks’ informal presidency of the EU.

Jacques Lafitte of the Avisa investment advisory group said Barnier’s 
appointment sent a very clear message of intent to Britain. “After all these 
years that the City has demonised Michel Barnier, often unjustly, the 
commission could not have sent a firmer message to the English,” he told Agence 
France-Presse.

But Mark Boleat, the policy chairman at the City of London Corporation, said: 
“Michel Barnier will bring a wealth of European political experience to the 
table. Financial markets are inter-connected across Europe. It is important 
that they are stable but also that they have clarity as soon as possible on 
what happens next to ensure they continue to serve customers and businesses.”

Barnier is seen in London as likely to represent the interests of France and 
Germany rather than the peripheral nations, but he is popular in the 
centre-right European People’s party and ministers said he would make it easier 
for a deal to be pushed through the European parliament. He also knows the UK’s 
Brexit minister, David Davis, from his time as Europe minister in the late 
1980s.

At a briefing in Westminster, one UK cabinet minister said Barnier’s 
appointment was a “clever move” by Juncker, giving the commission a direct line 
to the next French government and also gave him a heavy hitter to deploy in the 
negotiations.

Denis MacShane, a former Labour Europe minister, said Barnier had “enormous 
experience as a national government minister and knows better than anyone that 
EU negotiations are about national priorities”.

He added: “The UK press may try to demonise him or make him out to be 
unfriendly to Britain. It will be water off a duck’s back for Barnier. It makes 
perfect sense for Juncker to appoint a senior French politician; if he had 
named someone seen as an anglophile there would have been instant suspicions in 
many EU capitals that the commission was ready to roll over for London.”

Lobby group, TheCityUK, said: “Michel Barnier has a deep understanding of 
financial services – an industry that has to be an important component of a 
successful new relationship between the UK and the EU.

“The UK is the financial centre of Europe and we look forward to working with 
the Commission, the Council and the member states to achieve an agreement that 
delivers mutual benefits for the UK and the 27 member states.

The British Bankers Association, which represents the banking industry, 
refused to make any comment. Sources said this was a sign of the banking 
industry’s nervousness about the appointment.

Juncker said in a statement that Barnier, 65, who has also held the EU’s 
regional policy portfolio and was appointed Juncker’s defence and security 
special adviser in 2015, was a “skilled negotiator with rich experience in 
major policy areas relevant to the negotiations”.

Seen by British Eurosceptics as a classic Brussels insider and altogether too 
integrationist for their taste, Barnier has been minister forenvironment, 
European affairs, foreign affairs and agriculture minister in several French 
governments and co-organised, with Jean-Claude Killy, the 1992 Winter Olympics 
‎in Albertville‎, France.

An unsuccessful rival to Juncker for the job of commission president in 2014, 
Barnier will have the new official title of chief negotiator in charge of 
leading the commission taskforce for the preparation and conduct of the 
negotiations with the United Kingdom.

Theresa May has said London will take the time it needs to prepare its 
position before launching formal exit negotiations and Britain is not now 
expected by trigger article 50 of the treaty of Rome, setting the clock ticking 
on a maximum two years of talks, before early next year.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/19/Lore_of_the_jungle__life_with_Costa_Rica_s_indigenous_peoples.txt

"Go on," said Paulo, handing me a fistful of termites, "eat them."

It's a funny business, eating creepy-crawlies. Most of us will happily eat 
prawns (with their long whiskers and crunchy armour) but draw the line at their 
terrestrial equivalents, insects. Paulo had no such qualms, and nor did the 
rest of his tribe, the Bribri, an indigenous people living mainly in the south 
of Costa Rica. With great expertise, he'd hacked his way into a termite mound, 
and was scooping up the residents.

This all began when I asked Paulo how he'd survive, were he lost in the 
forest. It seemed a reasonable question at the time: we were three hours into 
the forest in the Cahuita national park, on the Caribbean coast close to the 
Panama border. Despite all the creatures glowing in the shadows – dart frogs 
and eyelash vipers – it was never much lighter than dusk. As always happens in 
good Costa Rican forest, I already felt pleasantly lost. We were also hungry. 
Paulo had found us lots of useful things (including arrowwood trees and a cure 
for tapeworms) but nothing to eat, and that's when I asked.

My wife, Jayne, hesitated but our seven-year-old daughter, Lucy, was soon 
picking out the termites and crunching them up like sweets. Paulo looked on 
with pride. After thousands of years of being largely alone, the Bribri now had 
visitors sharing their world – and eating their bugs (termites, by the way, 
taste of wood pulp, flavoured with puddle).
 Costa Rica map 

It's not hard to see why, for so long, eastern Costa Rica was overlooked. It 
didn't have gold (which the Spanish were after) nor the rich volcanic soils of 
the highlands, which later immigrants sought. And all the coffee was shipped 
out via the Pacific port of Puntarenas. Only in the 1870s was a railway line 
hacked through the forest from the capital San José to the Caribbean port of 
Limón – and that took 20 years to complete, and cost 4,000 lives.

These days, getting to the coast is easy enough. Although the "Jungle Train" 
has long gone (mostly thanks to an earthquake in 1991), a smart blacktop road 
now wriggles out of the highlands before plunging into the banana belt below. 
For hours, we drove through banana plantations, and then banana towns with 
names like Liverpool and Beverly. For a moment, it all seemed like Africa, 
except for the huge container parks, like cities without windows.

Then we were bouncing free, along the coast. This road was only built in 1977, 
and people still come out to stare at the cars. There was plenty of drama: 
toucans fighting over fruit, or vast pineapple trucks painted like fairground 
rides. We even spotted a policeman next to a small mountain of bootleg whisky. 
Until this road arrived, there were no checkpoints between here and Panama, and 
it seems even the smugglers have taken time to adjust.
 Toucan two … Lucy and Jayne on the San Juan river 
Eventually, we crossed into the province of Talamanca. Along this long, sandy, 
coconut-lined shore, there are few villages. Before the road came, the only 
people who lived here were the Bribri and a few turtle hunters, who'd made 
their way over from Jamaica. Caught between the jungle and the rip tides, most 
people had settled down to a life of ease. It's said that people still enjoyed 
Shakespeare here, and maypoles, just as they had in old Jamaica.

I enjoyed the little towns along this shore. One was Cahuita (with its 
national park and the toothsome termites). Another was Cocles, which consisted 
of a football pitch, a washerwoman, a grocery (selling mostly crisps) and an 
animal refuge, with owls and monkeys. For a child, the utter weirdness of the 
fauna was exhilarating, particularly the rays, gliding along the seabed like 
carpets come to life.

The main town was Puerto Viejo, or Old Port. It was the English who first 
recognised its charms, and in the 17th century it became a bolthole for 
pirates. These days things are less hurried, and buildings are made from 
driftwood. Our favourite restaurant, Koki Beach (kokibeach.blogspot.co.uk 
<http://kokibeach.blogspot.co.uk/>) had been built round an almond tree, and 
once suffered a rare indignity for a designer restaurant, being plundered by 
monkeys.

But, for the most part, it didn't feel as if things happened suddenly here. 
Electricity only arrived in 1986, and "beans'n'rice" was still top of most 
menus. The beaches went on forever, and the fishermen still set out through the 
surfers, in long canoes. Amid all this our hotel felt thrillingly alien. 
Inside, everything was a soothing white, and it had a pool that glowed pink and 
green at night. It was called Le Caméléon (lecameleonhotel.com 
<http://www.lecameleonhotel.com/>) but Lucy called it The Starship.
 Pacuare Lodge 
One day, we found a Bribri guide, Tirza, to take us round their reserve. Of a 
Costa Rican population of 4.5 million, there are only 63,000indigenas, and 
these people are gradually finding their economic muscle. Tirza's father was a 
herbalist, and lived near the Panama border. Like Paulo, he loved receiving 
visitors, and had even built a little auditorium of twigs and thatch. Out came 
powerful cures, magic rocks, and even an old stone axe-head. He said he knew 
more than 1,500 plants, and there was nothing the forest couldn't cure.

As we were leaving, I asked Tirza if she thought tourism was good for the 
Bribri. "Of course," she said. "It keeps the narcos out."

A few miles on, we visited some basket-weavers in their stilted hut deep in 
the forest. Inside, an old man was swinging in his hammock, and everyone said 
he was 112. I bought one of family's baskets; it's an exquisite thing, made of 
grass, and just big enough to hold an egg. I noticed that, from the rafters, 
hung everything you'd need for a life in the forest: gourds, bows, arrows, and 
a long length of snakeskin. The weavers said they'd like to take us trekking, 
four days into the jungle.

"Next time," I said, genuinely hoping there'd be one.

Our last few days were spent in Cabécar territory. Unlike the Bribri, they are 
mountain people, and live in the upper reaches of the Pacuare river. To get 
there, we retraced our steps into the highlands, until we got to the river. 
Then, from there, I joined a rafting trip while Jayne and Lucy went on by jeep 
(you need to be 12 to go rafting).

What followed was enjoyable, in a slightly terrifying way. One minute our 
little dinghies would be sliding briskly through the gorges, and the next an 
abyss would appear in the middle of the river. Our guide had names for all 
these rapids: Pinball, Nose-breaker and The Chasm. For a moment, we'd skim 
around the hole before being sucked down into the froth, knocked about and then 
hurled out, down the river.
 Jayne and Lucy on the beach near Puerto Viejo 
But the Pacuare was more than just a watery pummelling: it also led us to The 
Pacuare Lodge (pacuarelodge.com <http://pacuarelodge.com/>). It was an 
astonishing hotel, in a deep, narrow gorge. The building itself, on the site of 
an old Indian farm, was like a Cabécar stately home, with an enormous carapace 
of thatch. Lucy was enchanted. Wild pigs still came here foraging for fruit. 
More recently, the hotel's cameras had picked up ocelots and jaguars, an 
exhilarating thought when there's only gauze between your bed and the jungle. 
Lucy loved it. Each morning, we lay in our beds, listening to a distant roar. 
It was the howler monkeys,one of the loudest creatures on Earth 
<http://www.australiangeographic.com.au/journal/the-10-loudest-animals-on-earth.htm>
.

The waiters were all naturalists, and some were Cabécars. One day, we walked 
to their village, Nairi Awairi, four miles over the mountains. Our guide kept 
Lucy going by pointing out endless oddities such as leaf-cutter ants: 3,000,000 
females burning a motorway through the jungle, with their own natural weed 
killer. By contrast, the village seemed rather quaint, on the edge of a 
plateau. Only the shaman was at home, in a hut full of masks and arrows.

Back at the lodge, we took a dip in the river. Crocodiles may shun the upper 
Pacuare, but children love it: here's a swimming pool, bubbling down the stairs.

On our last day, Geraldo, an ex-hunter, took the girls zip-wiring in a complex 
cat's cradle of hawsers and platforms constructed 25m up in the canopy. For 
hours, Lucy and Geraldo squealed through the forest like a pair of conjoined 
bats.

We left Pacuare, as we'd arrived – in my case, by raft. This time, I had to do 
18 miles of Chasms and Nose-breakers. It was, I suppose, a timely reminder of 
the realities of lush, tame, herbaceous Costa Rica. It's easy to imagine you've 
inadvertently wandered into the Garden of Eden. Well, if that happens, here's a 
river to beat some sense back into you, and send you home with a few souvenir 
bruises.
 Home in Nairi Awairi, a Bribri village 
Getting there The trip was provided by Audley Travel (01993 838 638, 
audleytravel.com 
<http://www.audleytravel.com/Destinations/Central-America/Costa-Rica.aspx>).  
An 11-day trip costs from £1,695pp based on two sharing, including flights, 
accommodation and shared transfers. Itineraries can be tailor-made to include 
the lodges mentioned in the article. United Airlines (united.com 
<https://www.united.com/web/en-US/>) flies Heathrow-San Jose, via Houston or 
Newark, from £695.

More information Atec, the Talamancan association of ecotourism and 
conservation (ateccr.org <http://www.ateccr.org/>) is run by local indigenous 
people.

• John Gimlette is the winner of this year's Dolman Travel Book Prize with 
Wild Coast: Travels on South America's Untamed Edge (Profile, £8.99). To buy a 
copy for £7.19 including free UK p&p, go toguardianbookshop.co.uk 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846682537>
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/19/There_s_a_better_way_for_private_schools_to_help_the_state_sector.txt

It’s that time of year when private schools turn up at the government’s door 
like a jilted former flame asking to be taken back one more time. Their promise 
of10,000 “free” places to low-income families, just so long as the government 
stumps up the first £5,500 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/09/private-schools-in-england-propose-10000-free-places>
, feels like the relationship equivalent of drunkenly rolling around on the 
lawn, promising it will be different this time. We have been here before. From 
1980 until 1997 the government paid for about 5,000 children a year to attend 
private schools. Labour scrapped it, using the money to reduce infant class 
sizes for all children rather than a few thousand.

Still, it’s a smart move by the private schools to offer these “free” places 
to low-income families. Theresa May seems unhappy with the sector, and has 
vowed to make them help state schools. This announcement is a way for the 
private schools to get on the front foot. It’s also not ungenerous. On the 
basis of the IndependentSchools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> 
Council’s proposal, the cost to the taxpayer would be £5,500 per child – 
roughly the amount state schools receive annually for a pupil. The total cost 
for taxpayers is £55m. But average private school fees are around £15,500 so 
funding would be subsidised by the schools at an estimated £80m a year. That’s 
a fair amount of cash for needy children.

So far, so Oliver-Twist-gets-saved-by-a-wealthy-bloke. There’s just one 
problem: there’s not a lot of evidence this is the best way to spend the money. 
Despite their swimming pools and small classes, private schools don’t seem to 
make children much brighter. In 2013 tests sat by 15-year-olds across the UK 
showedstate schools outperformed private schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2013/jul/04/education-private-transform-state-schools>
 by some way once the wealth and background of their pupils were taken into 
account. Evidence is also growing that children who go to state schoolsdo 
better at university compared to their private school counterparts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/05/top-state-school-pupils-get-better-degrees-than-those-from-private-schools>
.

And who, exactly, will benefit from the plan? Assisted places required 
children to pass ability tests. Hence, it wasn’t so much helping “poor 
children” so much as “bright children who happened to be poor”. If this is what 
the ISC is selling, it’s a pup. Bright children tend to do well wherever they 
are educated. Siphoning them off merely leaves the state sector without its 
easiest-to-teach pupils. There is, however, one way to save this policy. If the 
ISC wants to impress the government, it should follow India’s lead. In 2009 it 
passed a law requiring all private schools to take 25% of pupils from among the 
poorest families. And it has to be done at random. No ability tests, no 
catchments areas. Admission is by lottery. If private schools were willing to 
take a fixed proportion of low-income pupils, at random, they would be fairly 
sharing the burdens of the school system. Which is a lot better than shouting 
about what has been lost and might actually help use private school resources 
for those who truly need them.

Laura McInerney is editor of Schools Week
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/19/The_heat_is_on_in_Miami.txt

The pool lay long and slim before me, all calm colours and sharp angles, like 
a Hockney painting, and I dived in for an early-morning, jetlagged swim. As I 
emerged at the other end, the pool boy waited for me with a towel. He was 
friendly in that American way, wanting to know my name, where I was from, what 
I did.

He was going to college. "How long did you have to study?" he asked. When I 
told him that I was barely educated, he looked momentarily confused and said: 
"Well, you've done OK." I looked around, up at the gorgeous art deco façade of 
Miami's Soho Beach House, up to my room with its sweeping balcony and sea 
views, and then out over the palms towards the rising sun and thought: 
"Tomorrow I may be bankrupt, but for this week at least, maybe I have."

Miami and I were made for each other. The city, a proper American metropolis 
with little truck for the faux historics of Boston or San Francisco, suited the 
Formica part of my nature. But it did have its depths – I could slip out of the 
sublime if troubled Miami City Ballet and into Versailles, the most famous of 
the Cuban restaurants on "Calle Ocho". So it was the perfect place to escape a 
British winter. A simple flight took me into sunshine. With a week, a couple of 
extravagant days in the city followed by a more reasonable trip down to the 
Keys offered up that little bit of weirdness that America can provide so well 
and which would get you through to spring.

But luxury first. Soho Beach House is part of the Soho House chain, so has a 
joint role as hotel and private members' club. At first this was unsettling, 
because it operates a far more friendly, if less predictable, regime than your 
average accommodation. Also, it was easy to get lost. The block, just north of 
South Beach, was built to house condos. I kept opening doors to discover new 
treats: a wood-panelled spa, a rooftop pool and bar, or a restaurant I didn't 
know was there.
 Winter sun on Miami beach. Photograph: Fabrizio Cacciatore/Getty Images 
Then sitting at the bar I found myself having a conversation with an 
Oscar-winning cinematographer. And the Beach House gets into the spirit of 
Miami. Last weekend saw the city host Art Basel, the big, bling international 
art fair, with the club the venue for parties thrown by the likes of Jay 
Jopling and Phillips de Pury.

Then there is the beach itself. I wandered down and was met by Manny. "How 
close to the sea do you want to be?" he asked. "Do you want your lounger 
pointing towards the sea or the sun? Now this is your cooler. It has water and 
oranges in it, all complimentary. Now Eve here can get you anything else. A 
burger? Sure! A glass of rosé? Perfect." I knocked my (plastic) wine glass into 
the sand and Eve returned. "I see you've had a little incident," she said, like 
a kindly nurse. "Have another."

Obviously this was preposterous. Almost as preposterous as the South Beach 
babes and guys slumped all about me having conversations that were, frankly, 
insane. "Dude, I've been living in Colombia, trying to get this business going. 
And you know, Colombians love whisky. And I had found this great Burmese whisky 
– really, I'm telling you: awesome whisky. Made by a Scotch [sic] brewer [sic]. 
I was all set to import it into Colombia – I had a container ready to go – and 
then, well, it turns out the same people who run the Colombian whisky business 
run the Colombian powder business. I had this Colombian girlfriend. She said: 
'You gonna die.'"

I understand this wouldn't suit everyone, but it suited me. After a couple of 
days I had the valet get the gold convertible I had hired and headed south.

After an hour I crossed Everglades marshland and pulled on to the bridge 
leading to Key Largo. Pretty soon each side of the ocean highway became a strip 
mall of boatyards, Circle K convenience stores, chandlers, bars, bait shops and 
diners. However odd you are, there is a place for you in the Keys.

With increasing regularity, bridges offered views of the sweep of the Atlantic 
on one side and the Gulf of Mexico on the other. I stopped in Islamorada for 
a night, turning down a side road and in Casa Morada finding a little slice of 
paradise – beautifully decked-out rooms giving on to a lagoon with a bar set up 
by crystal water and skiffs charging back from the fishing flats at sunset. 
Then the next morning I was down to Key West.

In one of the fishing shops I discovered a video from the 1970s about the 
great writers Jim Harrison and Tom McGuane in the Keys. It opened with the 
Conch Tour Train beginning its half-hourly trip hauling tourists around the 
island's two-by-four miles of wooden houses constructed by shipbuilders. Over 
the images one of the writers was saying: "Once you are in Key West there is 
that sense of being outside the law – you are at the end of America, you're in 
the Tropics."

I put up at the Cypress House, a large wooden bed and breakfast in the centre 
of the historic district, run by Dave Taylor. (The real rulers were actually 
two Schipperke dogs, Ben and Phoebe, who hosted complimentary sunset drinks 
with a finger buffet). Dave recently raised, much through the generosity of the 
guests, tens of thousands of dollars for those living with Aids in the Keys, 
for which he was crowned King of Key West. He had a knuckleduster ring to prove 
it. Cypress House was as brilliant and wonderful as Dave's diamanté crown 
brooch.
 The Seven Mile Bridge, connecting Knight's Key to the Lower Keys. Photograph: 
Getty Images 
It had been 20 years since I was in Key West, and in that time the cruise 
liners had arrived in numbers. This changed the nature of the centre. Now the 
main drag – Duval Street – is lined with shops selling T-shirts with slogans 
such as "FBI – Female Body Inspector" and "Who needs big tits?" But the 
edginess is still there: the lesbian shops fight back, offering T-shirts 
attacking the religious right.

The permanent population, furiously independent (they once declared a 
republic, with the slogan "We seceded where others failed"), preserve their 
strange and wonderful sense of the community. It was wandering through the 
streets at 6am on my way to Sandy's, a famous Cuban coffee shop and laundrette, 
that it was most clearly on view. Roosters strutted about the streets, crying 
up the dawn. A few early-morning souls sat on their verandas and greeted me 
warmly as I passed by.

Ultimately the Keys are all about the sea. To get on the water, I hired 
Captain Dexter Simmons to take me on his skiff. We motored out through the 
harbour as the sky cleared and the first heat of the sun arrived. A woman 
emerged from a yacht in a bikini and stretched, waving as we cut our way past, 
all three of us grinning in the frisson of the moment. Islands emerged and then 
disappeared, propped up on their mangrove roots, and we crossed channels where 
tarpon rolled.

Eventually we arrived at the Marquesas, a circle of islands out of sight of 
any other person. The rotten hull of a boat Cubans had used to escape Castro 
was the only reminder of our impact. Here Dexter turned off the engine and 
began to punt us through the shallows. I stood on the bow gazing into the clear 
water, searching for fish: permit, bonefish, rays, shark, barracudas… The sun 
beat down. Right then our winter seemed very, very far away.

Essentials

Soho Beach House has rooms from $495 (sohobeachhouse.com 
<http://sohobeachhouse.com>). Casa Morada has rooms from $229 (casamorada.com 
<http://casamorada.com>). Cypress House has rooms from $175 (cypresshousekw.com 
<http://cypresshousekw.com>). Virgin Atlantic 
<http://www.virgin-atlantic.com/en/gb/index.jsp> (0844 2092 770) flies daily 
from Heathrow to Miami from £573 return. Prices for seven-day car hire start 
from £100 (carrentals.co.uk <http://carrentals.co.uk>). For more information, 
go tofla-keys.co.uk <http://fla-keys.co.uk>
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/19/Twitter_road_trips_USA__Baltimore_to_Bar_Harbor__day_one___live.txt

3.57am BST 

Good night, Baltimore!

We're about to sign off now. What a day! Baltimore, you've excelled yourself, 
and your people have been amazing hosts. We're thinking about return visits 
already. Also we've barely scrapped the surface of the nightlife. Matthew and 
Lane, the owners of WC Harlan, have just come down. They've been following our 
journey through their city. "You should stay out late," says John, "we could 
take you to places that are really weird." Oh, the temptation.

Late nights and early mornings in Baltimore must really be something. But 
we're heading off to Philly tomorrow (keep those tips coming), so we need to 
hit the road early. (Must. Show. Restraint.) We're going to finish these 
cocktails – which are delicious – then head back to Hotel Brexton to crash out. 
Night all. Thanks for your tips!

Updated at 3.57am BST

3.52am BST 

John, the guy behind the twitter account <https://twitter.com/bad_decisions> 
for the barBad Decisions 
<http://www.makeabaddecision.com/Bad_Decisions/Home.html> in Fell's Point, has 
come to join us, too. He bought his bar in 2008, just before the economy 
tanked, so it's been a tough ride to the top, but it's well established now as 
one of the bars to go to in Baltimore – for tourists and locals. Just wish we 
had more time. 

3.49am BST 

'A love letter to Baltimore'

This rush to take in a long day in Baltimore is making everyone wistful … and 
Guardian editors are notoriously nostalgic for a certain HBO drama alluded to 
many times today. What could be more appropriate, therefore, as we slowly recap 
the day, than to hear David Simon, Bunk, Prop Joe and Bubs wax affectionate for 
Baltimore?

And for those who haven't yet seen the show, don't fear for any spoilers – 
it's just a bunch of proud professionals describing the city as they see it.

3.35am BST 

WC Harlan

One of the people who have kindly left tips for us is the owner of WC Harlan 
<https://id.theguardian.com/profile/albinopines/public> bar in Remington 
(Hampden and 23rd). He suggested we come down and check it out, so here we are. 

We never would have found it without that tip. It's a word-of-mouth joint 
that opened at the beginning of the year. It's hidden behind a nondescript 
black door on a residential street and has an old speakeasy vibe, lit by 
candles, with jazz music in the background. Cocktails are the speciality. We're 
about to check out the menu. 

Updated at 3.39am BST

3.29am BST 

Vicky's all too right – you can't do everything, especially in a city as 
packed full of diversity as Baltimore. Even their aquarium, named the National 
one <http://www.aqua.org/>alongside its smaller counterpart in Washington DC. 
It has five whole floors of exhibits, including a massive recreation of a coral 
reef and another of a kelp forest. It has aring of sharks 
<http://www.aqua.org/explore/baltimore/exhibits-experiences/shark-alley>, a 
freshwater crocodile <http://www.aqua.org/explore/animals#location=.l01>, and 
hundreds and hundreds of jellyfish 
<http://www.aqua.org/explore/baltimore/exhibits-experiences/jellies-invasion>, 
which, as we've recently been told, aretaking over the world 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2013/sep/26/jellyfish-theyre-taking-over/?pagination=false>
. 

To stave off any fears of jellyfish invasions, you can watch the aquarium's 
peaceful live feed far from its inhabitants' tentacles and teeth.

3.12am BST 

Hampden

Hampden is a lovely neighbourhood. Lots of little low-rise houses with wooden 
front porches. We passed the famousCafe Hon <http://cafehon.com/> – with a 
giant flamingo on its front - andCommon Ground cafe 
<http://www.commongroundsny.com/>, which were both tipped. You can't do 
everything. Shopping must be good round here during the day, with boutiques 
lining 36th Street – the main road. 

2.56am BST 

Aisha (@aishamk <https://twitter.com/AishaMK>), who recommended this place via 
Twitter, has called in to join us for ice cream. She's a photographer and went 
to Mica art school. Originally from DC, she has been in Baltimore since 2006. I 
ask her why she's stayed. Meg interrupts, "Er, why wouldn't she?" Fair point. 
Reminds me of the John Waters quote we started the day with.

Editor's addendum: below the line, TheGribbler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2878648> quotes – what else – 
The Wire <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i6EpfCzdMoY>, to that same point: "Why 
would anyone want to leave Baltimore, man, that's what I'm asking?" 

Updated at 2.57am BST

2.41am BST 

And as if that wasn't enough, the spoons here change colour. Watch this. 

2.33am BST 

Ice cream

Dessert time! We made it to the Charmery in Hampden. It opened around three 
months ago. The whole place smells of waffle cones – they make them on site. We 
just tried a spoonful of every flavour going. Most of them shouldn't work, but 
they do. Old Bay caramel is my favourite (a scoop of pure Baltimore), but 
there's also red licorice, baklavah, Berger cookie and cream (the local cookie 
that tipsters have mentioned) and pickle. Yes, pickle. And it's good. Really, 
it is. 

Updated at 2.34am BST

2.14am BST 

We're saying bye to the Woodberry now. On the way out, we come across a fire 
pit outside. A nice smell of bonfire in the early autumn air. It's still just 
about warm enough for outdoor dining. 

1.57am BST 

Yesterday at the Visionary Art Museum <http://www.avam.org/> I learnt of an 
unlikely connection between the famous Baltimore drag queenDivine 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divine_(performer)> and a recent British prime 
minister. Beneath a giant sculpture of Divine was the story of how she 
co-founded the Alternative Miss World contest with British artistAndrew Logan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrew_Logan>. When the original Miss World 
contest took legal action in the 70s, Logan and Co called on a young British 
lawyer to put their case together. They won. His name?Mr Tony Blair 
<http://www.avam.org/our-visionaries/andrew-logan.shtml>. 

1.50am BST 

Kylie studied in Washington DC for a semester and is now kicking herself for 
not making that 30-minute train journey before. Half an hour that's all it 
takes to get to Baltimore. The Bolt Bus <https://www.boltbus.com/>, like the 
Megabus <http://us.megabus.com/>, is also a really cheap way to get here from 
New York, taking around four hours. 

1.40am BST 

Speaking of architecture, LindaR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4185899> has suggested below 
the line two architectural oddities that there isn't nearly enough time for 
Vicky to see. Thus, the condensed Wiki of her tips

The Pagoda of Patterson Park 
<http://pattersonpark.com/places-in-the-park/pagoda/>: on a hill that was key 
to defending Baltimore from the British in1812 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_of_1812> – during a war that otherwise didn't 
go so well <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burning_of_Washington>for the young US 
– an architect was commissioned to build the city an observation tower. 
Ironically, he chose to follow all the latest British fads of the moment 
(1891), and chose to build the tower, seeing that his Victorian peers overseas 
were fascinated by Asian art. Thus: a pagoda in Baltimore, and an unclear 
verdict as to who won Hampstead Hill (yes, even the name).

Our other incongruous structure of the Baltimore skyline is the Druid Hill 
Conservatory <http://www.rawlingsconservatory.org/>, which, like any good 
preserve for flora built in the 19th century, has rooms for orchids, palms and 
cacti – and also hosts events such as "The Drunken Botanist 
<http://www.rawlingsconservatory.org/the-drunken-botanist/>", in which an 
author will discuss "the dizzying array of plants that humans have, through 
ingenuity, inspiration, and sheer desperation, contrived to transform into 
alcohol."
 Howard Peter Rawlings Conservatory. Photograph: /Wiki 
Updated at 3.15am BST

1.28am BST 

Architectonic Baltimore

Meg is still with us. She knows everyone, and the city inside out. She's a 
12th generation Baltimorean. She is doing a lecture soon about why Baltimore is 
more than The Wire and she's eager for people to get to know other sides of the 
city. She is also on the board for the Baltimore architecture foundation and so 
has been pointing out some incredible buildings. The architecture here has 
really impressed us all. Meg says she loves it because it has it all, from 
classic Georgian to beaux art to brutalist. And the row houses, of 
course, which are so uniquely Baltimore. 

Updated at 1.35am BST

1.13am BST 

We're balancing out the soup with some kale salad and green beans, so we don't 
feel too guilty. 

However, we have just had a great ice-cream tip. We're hoping it's still open 
when we're done. 

Updated at 1.14am BST

1.02am BST 

Greta: "Watching the Woodberry Kitchen's chefs is like watching a 
choreographed dance."

Updated at 1.13am BST

12.54am BST 

Woodberry Kitchen

It's pretty swish here. Huge, high ceiling. Lots of exposed brick and iron. 
Out back there are stacks of crates full of organic produce, and the menu lists 
all the farmers they work with. We've started with an oyster stew ($12) – it's 
essentially a cream and butter soup with oysters at the bottom. It's amazing. 

Updated at 1.17am BST

12.45am BST 

Woodberry

Woodberry is a neighbourhood in the north-central part of Baltimore, still 
within the city limits but quite a way from the Inner Harbour area where most 
tourists stay. It was a surprisingly green drive up here. There are converted 
mill buildings along the Jones Falls river. Many were abandoned until recently 
and one has become the Woodberry Kitchen, which is renowned for its 
farm-to-plate philosophy. 

Updated at 1.17am BST

12.26am BST 

Reader's guide to an evening in Charm City

Vicky and the team have tentatively decided on Woodberry Kitchen 
<http://www.woodberrykitchen.com/> for dinner and WC Harlan 
<http://www.yelp.com/biz/wc-harlan-baltimore> for a drink (per albinopines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317949>, among others), but 
not for lack of reader tips for meals and beverages.

Bertha's Mussels <http://www.berthas.com/>, back in Fell's Point, was 
recommended by 50states1day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12223034> for its "piece de 
resistance", its "Pelican Shrimp … honestly the best shrimp I've ever eaten".

Over at Witness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc>, 
meanwhile theinbetweendream 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/user/theinbetweendream> left an epic set of 
recommendations (previously quoted in full), suggesting not just Woodberry but 
also13.5 Wine Bar <http://135winebar.com/>, The Food Market 
<http://www.thefoodmarketbaltimore.com/>, and Rocket to Venus 
<http://www.rockettovenus.com/> for "fried PB&J".

Chap's Pit BBQ <http://www.chapspitbeef.com/> comes recommended by 
KurtDaConqueror <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12321188>, who 
has apparently taken 'The Wire' food tour and memorized the bit of trivia that 
"Dee and his friends went there in season 1 after one of them was promoted in 
the Barksdale hierarchy."

Other choice tips include Bo Brooks <http://www.bobrooks.coma>for crabs (what 
else), Holy Frijoles for $2 tacos (per @AishaMK <https://twitter.com/AishaMK>) 
and The Helmland <http://www.helmand.com/> for Afghan food, per ustr2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4215901> – and the unverified 
bit of trivia that its owner is Hamid Karzai's brother, per Luckychips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3810497>.

And finally, @Judio12 <https://twitter.com/Judio12>, @martindonnelly 
<https://twitter.com/martindonnelly> and AlexBoh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2928937> cut to the chase and 
demand that Vicky try Natty Boh, akaNatural Bohemian 
<http://nationalbohemian.com/agegate/?backto=/&loopval=1>, Baltimore's proud 
local beer.

12.05am BST 

Today we've been hopping in and out of cars to save time, but yesterday I had 
chance to take theCharm City Circulator <http://www.charmcitycirculator.com/>, 
which is a free bus service. Yes, completely free. It launched in 2010 as an 
eco initiative to encourage people not to be so reliant on their cars. There 
are a few lines across town and they come every 10 minutes. Boris, can we get 
one of these in London, please? As if.

11.55pm BST 

Foreshadowing …

11.46pm BST 

Some street art from the Station North neighbourhood, aka Charles North. It's 
another area undergoing revitalisation. 

There are murals on the floor too.

11.31pm BST 

Charles Village

Updated at 11.32pm BST

11.19pm BST 

The Painted Ladies of Baltimore

We've lucked out Meg is joining us and she has a car. That means we can get 
round more of your tips, in less time, we hope. A couple of minutes from the 
diner is the Charles Village area, which is known for its colourfully painted 
houses, nicknamed the painted ladies. We're going to do a bit of neighbourhood 
hopping round here. 

11.08pm BST 

This is not a recommendation to walk through Baltimore discalced 
<http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/discalced> – just a grateful anthem 
forxpix <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27270952> below 
the line.

Updated at 11.10pm BST

10.58pm BST 

Just a reminder that our next stop is Philadelphia. We're heading there 
tomorrow, via … we don't know where. Anyone got tips on which route to take, 
where to stop and what to see when we get there? We haven't got a place to stay 
yet either so need to get moving on making a reservation. Know a good hotel or 
B&B? Not too expensive, but with plenty of character.
 Recharging 
Updated at 11.02pm BST

10.48pm BST 

We've had a surprise visitor. I went to the bathroom and came back to find a 
lady sitting down at our table with Greta. It turns out it's one of our 
commenters, Meg Fairfax Fielding (aka blogger@pigtowndesign 
<https://twitter.com/PigtownDesign>), who has popped by to join us! She saw we 
were in the Paper Moon Diner and, seeing as she lives just round the corner, 
thought she'd swing by and say hi. That's the beauty of live-blogging, folks.

Updated at 12.05am BST

10.33pm BST 

Oh and there is a massive display of Pez dispensers again. I swear I haven't 
seen these things since the 80s and now that is the second display in as many 
days. What's with the Pez obsession, Baltimore? 

Updated at 10.38pm BST

10.18pm BST 

Just your average, ho-hum mannequin garden …

… run by Mike, manager of this wacky, nutty cafe.

10.07pm BST 

Paper Moon

The Paper Moon Diner <http://papermoondiner24.com/> is an explosion of colour 
that appears from nowhere after driving past the campus of theMica art school 
<http://www.mica.edu/>. It's brightly painted on the outside, and the garden is 
filled with all manner of oddities: a mannequin with a headdress made of 
spoons, a cow with five-inch eyelashes, a yellow bath tub filled with plants. 
Inside is like a bizarre toy store, with dolls and toy cars hanging from the 
ceiling.

9.52pm BST 

Bal'more tuneage

While the team is taking a moment to recoup, another playlist, this one with 
special thanks to @artbaretta <https://twitter.com/artbaretta> – tell us songs 
and we'll add 'em to the next one!

9.29pm BST 

We need a recharge – both us and our phone batteries. We're heading to Paper 
Moon Diner, as recommended in the comments below 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27259779>, for coffee. 
We're catching a taxi ride with Willy, a former gangster, so he says. Now he's 
in his early 70s, although that's hard to believe, and he wants to talk to us 
about the Karsdashians and America's Next Top Model. 

Updated at 9.33pm BST

9.14pm BST 

No poetaster

The Poe trivia, rumours and editorial corrections have been bouncing around 
the blog as Vicky rambles through Baltimore – what about some creative versions 
of his work?

First up: a surreal little animation of The Tell Tale Heart from 1953, banned 
from sight for British audiences and nominated for an Oscar in the states. Not 
sure what that means, exactly, so you can judge the creepy conscience tale for 
yourself:

And because Christopher Walken cannot resist anything and everything 
unsettling, he once recorded a reading of The Raven.

Updated at 11.19pm BST

8.41pm BST 

Steamed, spiced crab, wrapped in the newspaper match report of the Ravens NFL 
game yesterday – it doesn't get more Baltimore than that. I've been 
wondering what makes crab so special here. 

We've just had an education courtesy of Damye Hahn, who is the 
great-granddaughter of the founder. Her son works here too – fifth generation 
Faidleys.
 Damye Faidley working the counter. 
Maryland steams crabs, whereas a lot of places boil them. They also use their 
famous Old Bay seasoning. The slaw here has celery seeds in, which is her a 
German grandmother's recipe. Most importantly they use lump crab here. That's 
the good stuff. It takes 40 crabs to make a 1lb can. 

Updated at 8.41pm BST

8.21pm BST 

Wow. The crab cakes deserve the hype. Fleshy and full of flavour. There are no 
seats in here. You just stand up at the counter. Over one million clams and 
oysters are served annually, according to a sign.

The staff are really friendly, too. "Did you have enough?" calls a woman from 
behind the counter with a big grin. I get the feeling they get a lot of happy 
customers here.

Updated at 8.39pm BST

8.03pm BST 

At first we couldn't find Faidley's. Only because we were saying it wrong 
(it's fade-lees). Once we got that right, people's eyes light up. "Ah, you made 
the right decision," they say.

We get chatting to a guy called Mark at the counter. He has been coming here 
since the 70s. He's ordered the lump crab cake, the speciality. As have we.

Updated at 8.40pm BST

8.00pm BST 

Actually we lied. We do do know this tune - but it's not very complimentary. 
And we're all about the positive...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyhdh8kSM7lY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyhdh8kSM7lY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyhdh8kSM7lY&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyhdh8kSM7lY&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyhdh8kSM7lY>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyhdh8kSM7lY&media=>
close 
Updated at 8.03pm BST

7.51pm BST 

Ronald has inspired us - and we want to sing Baltimore's praises, too.

But we don't know any Baltimore tunes.

So, we asked Pasta Primavera <http://www.pastaprima.net/‎> - a Baltimore based 
independent music blog - to come up with a playlist for us. We couldn't find a 
fishy-sounding music blog. Sorry. And we don't know any of these tunes or 
bands, either. But you might - so you can sing along. And you can send us 
requests, too, and we'll cue 'em up for you - in the comments below or to
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>.

7.44pm BST 

So, Lexington Market <http://www.lexingtonmarket.com> is pretty intense. It's 
full of life. Everyone is talking at once. Quite a contrast from where we came 
from, which was deadly quiet.

On the way into the market - which is like a big food hall- we meet Ronald. 
Slung over his shoulder is range of scents for women and men, which he's 
selling.

"Erm, is that one called pussy? And what's that other one say - Michelle 
Obama?" I ask.

"Yeah," he says, "and they smell good."

Ronald is quite a character and he's singing Baltimore's praises. "Anything 
can happen here. It's baby New York. I love my city," he says.

Updated at 12.04am BST

7.31pm BST 

Reminiscence road: @Pigtown 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27268321> recalls the time 
they tookThe Guardian US <https://www.theguardian.com/us>'s very own Steve 
Busfield <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stevebusfield‎> (editor of the 
The Wire Re-Up 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780852652213>
 blog and book) around town to make the point thatBaltimore: It's Not Just The 
Wire 
<http://www.pigtown-design.blogspot.co.uk/2013/07/baltimore-its-not-just-wire.html>
. Steve took his daughters - just to be safe! 

[That's enough Wire - ed]
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/993898> Pigtown  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/993898> 23 September 2013 6:58pm
 <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27268321> 
I took one of your Guardian colleagues on a tour de Baltimore earlier this 
summer. @Busfield wrote the book on The Wire for the Guardian.

You can read about our 24 hours in Bmore here 
<http://www.pigtown-design.blogspot.com/2013/07/baltimore-its-not-just-wire.html>
. We managed a baseball game, lunch at Lexington Market, a Wire Tour, the 
military tattoo at Fort McHenry and more. Great fun with Busfield and his girls!

Updated at 12.04am BST

7.23pm BST 

Wire reader challenge:

@TonySoprano77  <>has popped up from below with this little bit of mischief 
about The Wire...
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4769481> TonySoprano77  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4769481> 23 September 2013 
6:46pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27267965> 
The Wire quiztime! You Guardian writers better step up! This one must come out 
of your memory, so dont cheat and look it up on internet or playback the dvd.

What did the waiter say when D'angelo took the dessert off the cart for his 
girl at the restaurant in season 1?

Updated at 7.34pm BST

7.13pm BST 

OK, Baltimore - it's crab time.

We've had plenty of tips for Faidley's <http://www.faidleyscrabcakes.com> (@ 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27266227>mwcarruthers 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27266227> - again - below 
in comments, and from local newspaper man and bloggerJohn Houser III 
<http://www.rouxde.blogspot.co.uk/> in this Guardian article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/21/baltimore-food-us-road-trip>).

Wire fans: This place was a winner for McNulty, too. He brought a crab cake 
delivery for his nightshift colleagues.

"Faidleys? You alright McNulty," said Kima. We're heading to Lexington market.

Updated at 7.18pm BST

7.02pm BST 
 American Visionary Art Museum, Baltimore, with Cosmic Galaxy Egg by Andrew 
Logan. Photograph: Massimo Borchi/Atlantide Phototravel/Corbis 
We've had multiple recommendations for the American Visionary Arts Museum 
<http://www.avam.org> (thanks hellsbadger 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27157104> and mwcarruthers 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27145202>among others)and 
we really wanted to go. But it's closed on Mondays. GAH!

Yet the plan wasn’t a complete washout. Well, at least, not for me. I arrived 
earlier than the others, so I was able to pay it a visit yesterday by myself. 
And it was extraordinary. And brilliant.And frankly every city should have a 
museum like this one.

It’s designed to celebrate the outsider and houses the work of all sorts of 
unconventional artists, including the homeless, or just people whose work would 
have otherwise been overlooked.
It’s impressive from the outset. The building is flamboyantly decorated in 
mosaics of shattered mirror and broken glass. Inside, the main hall has a quote 
by Einstein: “Imagination is more important than knowledge.” Beneath it, 
there's an array of paintings, models and carvings, all with a little panel 
explaining the artist’s story. Every one is fascinating.

Upstairs, there’s a man’s collection of over 1,000 Pez-sweet dispensers 
(remember them?) and a stegosaurus made of rubbish. There’s also an area 
dedicated to the work ofFrank Bruno  <http://www.artistfrankbruno.com>(that’s 
the apocalypse-inspired artist from Arizona, not the British boxer). I read how 
he was denied admission to art school, but later managed to sell a painting 
through gallery; how he hated dealing with art dealers and since then he’s 
vowed never to sell another piece of his work – not even to a fanbase that 
includes Johnny Depp.

So, in sum, the advice to come here was spot-on. Definitely worth seeing. Just 
don’t come on a Monday.
 American Visionary Art Museum, Baltimore. Photograph: Massimo 
Borchi/Atlantide Phototravel/Corbis 
Updated at 12.03am BST

6.37pm BST 

Poe story correction: Poe had his last drink at the Horse You Came In On on 
October 7 1849. He was found soon after, delusional, in the street outside. He 
was taken to Washington College Hospital and died soon after, at 5am

Updated at 12.03am BST

6.35pm BST 

We were told to try one if the beers by local brewery Brewers Art. Happy to 
oblige. This one is called Resurrection.
Natalie Aja (@natalieaja) 
@vickybaker <https://twitter.com/vickybaker> @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> and checkout Max's in Fells Point. Try to 
get a local brew Union, Heavy Seas or Resurrection (:#baltimore 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23baltimore&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/natalieaja/statuses/382150438227050496> September 23, 
2013 <https://twitter.com/natalieaja/statuses/382150438227050496> 
Updated at 6.36pm BST

6.24pm BST 

We're in the Horse You Came In On bar. It's an old-fashioned saloon, with 
swing doors and bar stools designed to look like horse saddles. Jack Daniels 
bottles line the walls and there's some live acoustic music, playing to a 
handful of patrons. The bar man confirms that Poe died here [er not, true 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edgar_Allan_Poe> - ed]. It was his favourite 
place and he was here all the time [probably true - ed].

Oh, and it dates back to 1775 - the only pub in Maryland open before, during 
and after the prohibition <http://www.thehorsebaltimore.com/history/>.

Updated at 7.15pm BST

6.19pm BST 

We're deliberately resisting bringing you too many Wire references too early 
in this blog, and instead refer you to a scene from one of author David Simon's 
earlier works of genius - Homicide, Life on the Street, featuring one John 
Waters, and with reference to one Edgar Allan Poe.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9XT_I1t5aA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9XT_I1t5aA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9XT_I1t5aA&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9XT_I1t5aA&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9XT_I1t5aA>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9XT_I1t5aA&media=>
close 
Updated at 6.46pm BST

5.55pm BST 

So calm on the water, no sound at all but the ripple of the sail.

We're heading back to shore now.

Some tippers have mentioned Edgar Allan Poe, who lived in Baltimore and died 
here. He liked to drink in a saloon calledThe Horse You Came In On <>, 
apparently. Allegedly, he was walking home from the pub when he was found 
delirious on the streets of Baltimore, and died the next day in hospital aged 
40. There arerumours that his ghost lives on in the bar 
<http://www.baltimorestories.com/main.cfm?nid=2&tid=59>. It's here in Fells 
Point, so we're going to go and check it out.

Updated at 6.21pm BST

5.35pm BST 

5.27pm BST 

Sail's up. It's a 32ft boat with a small room and three beds - somehow. We're 
heading past all the industrial shipyards.

"Ooh, it's like series two of the Wire," I say.

"I haven't seen TV in eight years," says Alex.

Wire banter is off the cards, then. Although that would almost take us back to 
series 2, wouldn't it? .

Updated at 5.33pm BST

5.01pm BST 

So we're off on an adventure. We just met Jared and Alex in their boat, moored 
by the pier. They're planning to take it - and its Grateful Dead flag - around 
the world. They've covered 500 miles so far, from Long Island. We're jumping 
aboard and going for a sail to see Baltimore from the other side - from out on 
the water.

Updated at 5.26pm BST

4.58pm BST 

Fells Point naval history 101 (with thanks to the Pride of Baltimore website 
<http://www.pride2.org/history/1812.php>).

During the second war of independence, in 1812, American privateers, many of 
them sailing out of Chesapeake Bay in Baltimore Clippers built in Fells Point, 
captured or sank some 1,700 British merchant vessels during the two and a half 
year war.

In retaliation for the actions of the Baltimore privateers, the British 
launched the Chesapeake Campaign in 1814 for the purpose of "cleaning out that 
nest of pirates in Baltimore." Its goal - to shut down the shipyards of Fells 
Point and halt the production of the deadly Baltimore Clippers.

On their way up the Bay, the British captured and sacked Washington, DC. They 
burned the Capitol and White House. Continuing up the Bay, they sought to 
capture Baltimore by land and by sea. On September 12, 1814, Baltimore troops 
fought a two-hour battle to delay the British land forces at the Battle of 
North Point before they reached the City. Fort McHenry, at the mouth of 
Baltimore harbor, withstood a ferocious 25-hour naval bombardment on September 
12 and 13, 1814. It was during this bombardment that Maryland lawyer/poet 
Francis Scott Key, spotted "by dawn's early light" the huge "star spangled 
banner" still flying over Ft McHenry. He penned a description of the sight and 
the poem has gone down in history as "The Star Spangled Banner."

Updated at 5.00pm BST

4.46pm BST 

So we've only seen one side of Baltimore so far, but downtown is immaculate. 
Brick buildings, all perfectly kept. Fells Point square, down by the waterside, 
is full of ice-cream parlours, restaurants and pretzel stalls. But on a 
low-season Monday afternoon, there are no tourists in sight. 'A nest of 
pirates' is what the British dubbed Fells Point, back in the days when it was 
one of the most important shipbuilding centres in the nation. It's certainly 
not like that now.

4.42pm BST 

Well fed and well caffeinated, we're heading out into the surrounding streets 
of Fells Point, a lovely neighbourhood that tippers have recommended. We've 
called into the Chesapeake Souvenirs & Gifts store in the main square. We're 
talking to the owner, Sandra, who worked here for 13 years before taking it 
over. Big sellers seem to be anything crab related. Greta is buying a snow 
globe - one in every city, that's the plan.

Updated at 4.43pm BST

4.19pm BST 

This is how much better Kylie feels after a Blue Moon breakfast (#not 
celebrating Man City's victory).

4.03pm BST 

While we're waiting for updates from Vicky and Greta, we want to make it clear 
that the choice of the Blue Moon Cafe was in no way related to Man City's 
drubbing of Man Utd yesterday. Is there a blue moon over Baltimore? We couldn't 
say...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPrBb89yncJ4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPrBb89yncJ4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPrBb89yncJ4&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPrBb89yncJ4&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPrBb89yncJ4>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPrBb89yncJ4&media=>
close 
3.56pm BST 

Breakfast (and maple syrup) - you are in us!

French toast is served. Wow. Intense sugar rush for a Monday morning. It's 
really good - not greasy at all. I'm pretty sure it's going to beat me though. 
It's huge. The place is still buzzing, constant flow of diners, staff rushed 
off their feet. Constant filter coffee refills, though - one of the great 
things about breakfasts in the US.

We're in! We've got a table and there's a massive glass bottle of ... 
something on the table. Greta is inspecting it. It's syrup. A litre of syrup. 
This bodes well.
I've ordered the house speciality, Captain Crunch French toast. Toast fried 
and encrusted in sugary cereal, topped with fresh fruit and cream.
There's also a dish known as Sweet Baby Jesus - hash browns stacked with jumbo 
lumb crab meat, smothered in cheese, two eggs, hollandaise sauce and Maryland 
Old Bay seasoning. Phew. It's an effort just to type it, let alone eat it. 
We're passing on that one and saving our crab experience for later.

Updated at 4.17pm BST

3.38pm BST 

Bawlmor. Baldamore. Bawlmer. Better bleeve it, hon!

Nice tips sent in by @theinbetweendream on GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com>, also touching on the local accent...

You Ain't Seen Bawlmor 'til You Seen Hampden Hon! 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc/552069>

Baltimore is the home of the Hons. There is a distinct class of people here 
and a unique language known as "Bawlmorese."

If you want a truly Bawlmor experience, you'll head to Hampden, a local 
neighborhood nestled behind Johns Hopkins University. Head up 83 N from the 
Inner Harbor and exit on Falls Road. You'll make a right on 36th Street - 
affectionally known as "De Avenue Hon" and you will be dropped into a world of 
hipsters and hons. You can shop all day in antique shops, used bookstores, 
clothing and consignment shops, order up a massage, and even take in a yoga 
class.

For good eats, these are my recommendations -

Coffee and a light breakfast/lunch - Common Ground.

Brunch or Breakfast - Cafe Hon or Golden West.

Exotic but Amazing Cuisine - Corner B.Y.O.B (Yes, it's BYOB and it's cash 
only, corking fee), but ...

Take away Alcohol - Wine Source (just behind Corner BYOB, very convenient! and 
has a huge selection of wines, beer and liquor)

Fine Dining - 13.5 Wine Bar, The Food Market, or if you want to drive a bit - 
I definitely recommend Woodberry Kitchen down Union Street)

Dessert - walk to Rocket to Venus and order the fried PB&J...Delicious!

For a true Bawlmor experience, travel to The Dizz on Remington, just off the 
beaten path. You'll get one of the best burgers in town!

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By theinbetweendream <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/theinbetweendream> 

20 September 2013, 0:26 

The accent, apparently, takes some getting used to, as touched upon - 
none-too-sensitively, it has to be said - by Baltimore sportswriter and 
novelist Frank Deford in theSmithsonian magazine 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/travel/bleeve_it.html>:

Baltimoreans talked funny, a horribly grating nasal accent, sort of lispy, 
somehow produced because it was here where the harsh Bronx tones from the North 
crashed head-on into the softer hillbilly lilt moving up from the hollows of 
the Alleghenies. All sorts of dictionaries have been written, trying to capture 
the accent and its spelling. Here is a sampling:Bawlmer, air hametown, is in 
the state of Merlin, which is bounded onna ees by the Lanick Ayshun and onna 
souf by air Merkin capital, Warshnin, Deecee. You better bleeve it, hon.

Deford goes some way to digging himself out of the hole by paying this 
somewhat backhanded compliment to his home town:

The three best-known Baltimore writers contemporaneous with me are the 
novelist Anne Tyler and the film director-screenwriters Barry Levinson and John 
Waters. Tyler and Waters concentrate their work virtually exclusively on 
Baltimore; Levinson, mostly so. (The best Bawlmer accent ever realized by an 
outsider was by Danny DeVito in Levinson's Tin Men.) The devotion to things 
Baltimore by these storytellers best illustrates, I think, what a singular and 
vivid place it is. Baltimore has character and nuance, and although I may not 
have written about it all that much myself, I know that even though I left 
there many years ago, Baltimore put its stamp on me in ways I'm not so sure 
other more standard-issue cities could impress on their expatriates.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuJF--0xbjmQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuJF--0xbjmQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuJF--0xbjmQ&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuJF--0xbjmQ&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuJF--0xbjmQ>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuJF--0xbjmQ&media=>
close 
Updated at 3.47pm BST

3.13pm BST 

We made it to the Blue Moon Cafe  <>in Fells Point. It's very cute. A 
blue-and-purple, ivy-covered, end-of-terrace building. And there's a queue - 
even on a Monday. Our Russian taxi driver told us it was popular. We've put our 
names down and we're waiting on the pavement for a table.

3.07pm BST 

We've just been to the Peabody Institute <http://www.peabody.jhu.edu/> at 
Mount Vernon Place to try and get a look at its incredible library. Our luck 
was out as someone has hired it to film a commercial, but we had a little peak 
in the reception at its ornate spiral staircase.
 George Peabody Library, Baltimore. Photograph: Jacob Kepler 
Updated at 3.10pm BST

2.26pm BST 

Before breakfast, we're taking a wander around the neighbourhood, Mount Vernon 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mount_Vernon,_Baltimore>. It's full of stunning, 
historical buildings. At its centre is the Washington Monument, which predates 
the more famous one in DC, which was built by the same guy,Robert Mills 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Mills_%28architect%29>. George is looking 
almost like a roman emperor at the top there.

2.18pm BST 

For breakfast, we’re going to follow up on a tip that came through Twitter from
@suziexlee <https://twitter.com/suziexlee/status/380687845989814272> for the 
Blue Moon Cafe <>.
I’ve taken a look at the website, and it seems to be a local favourite. The 
main photo also makes it look as though the owner - Conceptionista Sarah 
Simington - might read your tarot cards or discuss horoscopes while you eat 
your pancakes. Intriguing.
Have you got a better suggestion for breakfast? We’re going to need a good 
joint tomorrow, too, before heading onward to Philly, so get in touch.

We’ve heard that Michel Phelps, who grew up on the outskirts of Baltimore, has 
been known to fuel up at Pete’s Grille andwe all know about his breakfasts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2008/aug/13/michaelphelpsreallybigbrea>
. Is that worth a look? Or anywhere else? We may need a breakfast of champions 
ourselves, as we have a lot of driving ahead of us in these next few days.
Suzie Lee (@suziexlee) 
@guardian <https://twitter.com/guardian> @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> Blue Moon Cafe in Baltimore is a hole in 
the wall with infamous Captain Crunch French Toast!
 <https://twitter.com/suziexlee/statuses/380687845989814272> September 19, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/suziexlee/statuses/380687845989814272> 
2.16pm BST 

So, this is us – the first all-female Guardian road trip.

That’s me on the left. I’ve been working on all the other TwiTrips from the 
other end, on the Guardian travel desk, putting the other writers through their 
paces, watching the editor crack his whip. I’m not yet sure if this trip is my 
reward or my comeuppance.

There’s Greta <http://www.gretarybus.com>, our photographer, in the middle. 
Originally from Idaho, she went to college in Montana, but now lives in Maine. 
Later in the week, we’re hoping to swing by her current hometown, Portland, 
which she says has lots of cool hotspots - if you know where to look. Also, 
Greta arrived in town last night just before midnight after attending a 
friend’s wedding, so we’ll be getting her an extra-large coffee to start the 
day.

And, finally, on the right is Kylie <>, who usually works as a TV producer and 
has just arrived from a shoot in Mexico after a 48-hour journey (so will also 
need a strong coffee). On this trip, she will be taking charge of the driving 
and navigation, as Greta and I blog and post photos. Can anyone hazard a guess 
as to where Kylie is from? I’ll give you a clue: she grew up on a farm where 
her family had a pet kangaroo.

1.42pm BST 

This is the sixth and final live roadtrip in the series, and I’ll do a proper 
introduction of our team shortly.

The story so far: we grouped together last night at the Brexton Hotel 
<http://www.brextonhotel.com/> in Mount Vernon. This historic neighbourhood was 
tipped by a few people in our comments section (thanksoriginalversion 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27167368>), and also our 
local experts in last week’s travel Q&A 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27110072>.
It’s a beautiful red-brick building, built in the late 1800s and with interior 
spiral staircases leading to turrets on the top. It was the adolescent home of 
Wallis Simpson andfell into complete disrepair 
<http://www2.citypaper.com/news/story.asp?id=3021>, laying empty as a 
“crumbling pigeon coop”, until an ambitious 2010 makeover. A room now cost 
around $130 (£80) a night, which seems like a good deal having surveyed some of 
the other hotels in the city, including the few B&Bs (fully booked) and the 
pricey, big chain properties down by the regenerated harbour.
All in all, the Hotel Brexton is a decent base and well located, but the 
downside is the breakfast: hidden in a basement room, with coffee coming from a 
canteen-style machine. So, we’re going to skip that today and head out into the 
city. Any recommendations for a good breakfast, Baltimore-style?

Updated at 2.05pm BST

12.00pm BST 

Waking up in Baltimore

“Good morning, Baaal-ti-more!” If you’re hearing that in a singsong voice, it 
may be because you’ve seen the musical Hairspray, famously set here. Tracy 
Turnball’s opening number is a warts-and-all love song to her hometown, 
namechecking the good points, as well as the neighbourhood rats and the 
“flasher next door”. They’ll be none of those on this trip, I hope, but those 
lyrics do say something about the city’s fairly gritty reputation. Apparently, 
some show called The Wire was set here too. Never heard of it.*
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjjWJEeVpBw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjjWJEeVpBw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjjWJEeVpBw&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjjWJEeVpBw&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjjWJEeVpBw>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjjWJEeVpBw&media=>
close 
From what I’ve read about Baltimore, it seems like a down-to-earth and 
self-aware sort of place. Also things are moving on fast. There are 
regeneration stories aplenty, and I’ve been hearing a lot about its thriving 
arts scene. And although I’ll move on from the John Waters references in a 
moment, this is a great quote from him:

I would never want to live anywhere but Baltimore. You can look far and wide, 
but you'll never discover a stranger city with such extreme style. It's as if 
every eccentric in the south decided to move north, ran out of gas in 
Baltimore, and decided to stay.

Is he right? Today’s the day to find out.
It’ll be a whistlestop tour - we have just over 24 hours in the city - but 
we’ll be packing in as much as we can, based on your suggestions, and we’re 
live-blogging it all the way. That means if you dive in with a good comment, we 
can head right over there. (Hint: we’ll need places to eat and drink, plus 
sights to see all day and some bars for this evening.)

We’ve had some brilliant tips already, but please keep them coming, and also 
for the other places on our hitlist – Philadelphia, Boston, Portland...

* Of course, I was kidding about not having seen the Wire. It is mandatory for 
Guardian workers to pass a test on series one to five before being allowed in 
the building. I’ll try and pick out some sites from the show as we make our way 
around town.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/20/Fabio_Liverani_s_Orient_claim_lifeline_with_Port_Vale_win.txt

Before Saturday’s 3-1 defeat of Port Vale at Brisbane Road, Leyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient> had had as many managers 
this season as home wins. Their fifth was much needed. Other results mean they 
remain 22nd in League One, their division since 2006.

A year ago, a model of stability under Barry Hearn’s ownership (19 years) and 
Russell Slade’s management (four), they entered April having never been out of 
the top three and ended up losing to Rotherham on penalties in the play-off 
final after leading 2-0. Now, instead of looking up, they are trying not to 
look down.

It all changed in July when Hearn, having failed to stop West Ham securing the 
Olympic Stadium and encroaching on Orient’s fanbase, sold the club for £4m to 
Francesco Becchetti. A fan for 55 years, Hearn, now honorary president and 
still owner of a ground that, with its four tower-block corners, feels like a 
well – or perhaps Hearn bay – said in January he had no regrets about selling. 
But he did suggest that “the danger for an East End club is to be run as an 
Italian club. For whatever reason a very good management structure was 
virtually entirely replaced.” Becchetti made his money in waste management.

He quickly spent some of it on older players, Jobi McAnuff and Darius 
Henderson among them, as well as a couple of Italians, divisively on wages 
three times as high as that of the players in situ. On Saturday McAnuff was 
away with Jamaica and Henderson, due to start, was held up by a traffic 
accident and relegated to the bench. With Ryan Hedges absent with Wales 
Under-21s and Romain Vincelot, chief creator, out for the season with a knee 
injury, their victory gains in virtue.

It was unimaginable for 40 minutes, with Vale as slick as Orient were slack. 
For almost half a century, until 1945, the home side were Clapton Orient. Here 
they looked more clapped out. Alex Cisak fisted over a Louis Dodds bullet and 
Gary Sawyer cleared off the line before Chris Birchall put Vale ahead. Cisak 
then got just enough on Tom Pope’s shot to stop a second. Before half-time, 
though, David Mooney and Dean Cox at least hinted at riposte.

Rumours had told of communication problems with the manager, Fabio Liverani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/09/fabio-liverani-managing-leyton-orient-is-an-important-project>
, and of the players doing their own team talks. Whoever said what, they 
changed from men dispossessed to a team possessed. Chris Dagnall inspired a 
thrilling move before having a shot beaten out by Chris Neal, who was then sent 
off for tripping him when clean through. Mooney converted the penalty. Dagnall 
was later to hit a post and the bar.

Between times Neill Collins put into his own net under pressure from Jake 
Taylor, freshly on loan from Reading,Mooney wasted a second penalty and Cox 
fired home from 25 yards. As Vale capitulated to a fourth defeat running home 
fans danced on the verandahs.

Slade, with 10 points from eight games, has the best record of the four 
managers and Liverani may need at least that strike rate to survive. Their last 
four games are against the sides now in the play-off positions. If they fail, 
they could always become Leyton Occident.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/20/Roma_close_on_record_as_Bradley_counters_charge_of_squad_s_lack_of_depth.txt

Antonio Di Natale reacted as only he knows how. After the Udinese striker was 
flagged offside during the second half ofhis team's game against Roma on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/27/roma-beat-udinese-serie-a-report>
, he marched straight over to the linesman who had made the call. The official 
braced himself for an earful;instead he got a kiss on the forehead 
<https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/394484077803225088/photo/1>.

Soon afterwards, Di Natale was spotted pinching the cheek of referee Mauro 
Bergonzi <https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/394492517841793026>. He 
received no punishment, of course. Di Natale has always had a knack for getting 
away with more than he should. When he first asked his now wife, Ilenia, out on 
a date as a teenager, she jokingly asked if he had really wanted to go with her 
twin sister, Genny.He replied with a shrug 
<http://blogs.thescore.com/counterattack/2011/11/01/bandini-snubbed-by-the-ballon-dor-udineses-di-natale-fears-death-not-football/>
, saying: "Either of the two would be fine."

But if Di Natale's mischievous charm has taken him far in life, then it is his 
goals which have carriedUdinese <https://www.theguardian.com/football/udinese>. 
He scored 103 of them across the past four league campaigns, twice finishing as 
Serie A'scapocannoniere. Such consistency has also helped to turn Udinese's 
Stadio Friuli home into a fortress; Roma arrived on Sunday knowing that no 
visiting team had won there since September 2012.

The Giallorossi were better equipped than most to threaten that record. Five 
points clear at the top, they had won all eight of their league games to date. 
And yet they would be missing two key starters up front, with both Francesco 
Totti and Gervinho ruled out due to injury. That pair had already combined for 
six goals and seven assists.

As brilliant as Roma had been, furthermore, some observers remained sceptical 
of their squad depth. They had used just 17 players through the first eight 
games, fewer than anyone else in the division. TheRoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> manager, Rudi Garcia, hardly 
soothed fans' concerns with his pre-game remark that "nature abhors a vacuum, 
so someone will have to play".

In reality, of course, Garcia knew that he still had some solid options 
available to him. Totti's shoes would be filled by Marco Borriello, while Adem 
Ljajic replaced Gervinho. The former scored 12 goals while playing for a far 
more modest Genoa team last year, while the latter had found the net three 
times in five appearances (four of them off the bench) since joining from 
Fiorentina in the summer.

Nevertheless, Roma did start poorly on Sunday. Within three minutes of 
kick-off, Luis Muriel had hit a post for Udinese. A quarter of an hour later, 
Di Natale went clean through only to see a disappointing shot saved easily by 
Morgan De Sanctis. By that point Udinese were sweeping forward in waves, 
hitting their opponents hard on the counter. Only an athletic goalline 
clearance from Leandro Castán saved Roma from falling behind to a Gabriel Silva 
strike shortly before half-time.

The visitors improved after the break, defending more cohesively and beginning 
to apply pressure down the flanks, but any hopes of a victory seemed to have 
been fatally undermined when Maicon was sent off for a needless second booking 
in the 66th minute. Garcia re-shaped his team into a cautious 4-4-1, with 
Vasilis Torosidis replacing Miralem Pjanic. Soon the manager would replace 
Borriello with an additional midfielder, Michael Bradley.

This was only the American's third appearance of a frustrating season. Bradley 
has been out of action since injuring an ankle while warming up for a World Cup 
qualifier against Costa Rica in early September, and has since watched Roma 
excel without him.

Anxious observers in the US had already begun to ask what the player's 
prospects would look like when he returned. A midfield trio of Pjanic, Daniele 
De Rossi and Kevin Strootman has arguably been the greatest strength of 
Garcia's new-look Roma. Their success left no room for Bradley to force his way 
back into the starting XI – especially given the new manager's reluctance to 
rotate.

Speculation began that the player might seek a January transfer. Such talk was 
entirely premature. Bradley has shown no interest in leaving, nor his club in 
selling. Both parties were entirely focused on getting the player fit and back 
in position to help Roma's cause.

He did that on Sunday in dramatic fashion, scoring the game's only goal with 
less than 10 minutes left to play. Roma had not done much attacking in the wake 
of Maicon's sending off but after De Rossi picked out Strootman with a direct 
ball forwards from midfield, the Dutchman laid it off to Bradley on the edge of 
the D. From there, he stroked an immaculate first-time finish into the bottom 
corner of the net.

It was enough to secure Roma their ninth consecutive win to start this season. 
Only Juventus, in 2005-06, had ever achieved such a feat inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>. Their achievements in 
that season have since been expunged from the official record books as a result 
of the Calciopoli scandal.

In fact, Gazzetta dello Sport claimed on Monday that the longest-ever winning 
sequence to start a season in any of Europe's top leagues stands at just 11 
games – set by Tottenham in 1960-61. For Roma, matching that total no longer 
seems inconceivable. They have scored the joint-most goals of any team in Serie 
A (23) and conceded just once. Their next game is at home to last-placed Chievo 
on Thursday night.

Of course, there are some who believe Roma have been riding their luck. 
Sunday's game was the second in a row in which their opponents had both hit the 
woodwork and had a shot cleared off the line. "But you earn your luck, it 
doesn't arrive on its own," argued Garcia. "If someone gives everything on the 
pitch, and throughout the week, they can get rewarded for it."

Bradley might just be the poster boy for such beliefs – a player whose entire 
career has been built on hard work and a refusal to be deterred. As a child, 
after determining that the two training sessions and one weekly match offered 
by his own team were not enough,he took to showing up at his local club every 
day until coaches gave in 
<http://sports.espn.go.com/sports/soccer/news/story?id=5077789> and let him 
play with the older kids on the days when his own group was not practicing.

In his professional career he has taken every setback as further motivation, 
joining Chievo in 2011 in order to get back to playing regularly after a 
frustrating spell at Aston Villa, and then forcing Italy's biggest clubs to 
take notice with his all-action performances. It is hard to imagine his spirit 
being broken now by a little competition for places.

"We still have 29 games to go, and we need everyone," said Bradley after 
Sunday's game. "You won't win anything with 11 soloists. We all need to makes 
sure that we are ready at the right moment. I will give everything, just as I 
did when I was out injured."

Hard work itself, though, still might not be the whole picture. Shortly after 
full-time on Sunday Totti posted on his own website the unique qualities that 
he thought had contributed to Roma's victory. "Congratulations to my 
team-mates," he wrote. "Each one showed courage, strength and, as we say around 
here, two massive balls!"

He went on to praise the club's supporters, roughly 1,000 of whom were waiting 
for the team when they returned to Fiumicino airport. After a start to the 
season that has gone beyond all realistic expectations, they too had reacted as 
only they know how.

Talking points

• Mario Balotelli shaved off his Mohawk on Friday, a symbolic gesture designed 
to represent his turning over of a new leaf after one too many distractions 
over the past few weeks. And then, on Sunday, the player turned in one of his 
worst performances in a Milan shirt, getting hauled off by Massimiliano Allegri 
early in the second half of his team's game at Parma. TheRossoneri were 2-0 
down at the time, but, inspired by Kaká – himself on as a substitute – they 
rallied to equalise, only to then blow it all by conceding again in second-half 
injury-time. Nine games into the season, Milan are already 16 points behind 
Roma, although Allegri did try to raise the mood by confirming in his post-game 
interviews that the club would sign Keisuke Honda from CSKA Moscow in January.

• Juan Cuadrado was the star of the show for Fiorentina at the weekend, 
scoring both his team's goals in a win at Chievo. It was subsequently reported 
by Sky Italia that Arsenal had submitted a bid to sign the player in January 
but that it had been turned down by the Italian club. Vincenzo Montella refused 
to discuss the matter afterwards, saying: "Now is not the time for transfers."

• Adidas let it be known before the weekend that Mauro Icardi would be playing 
this weekend in a quite remarkable new pair of "lion-dog boots", designed by 
Yohji Yamamoto. Inevitably, Icardi never actually made it off the bench in 
Internazionale's 4-2 win over Verona. Still, the boots are quite something to 
behold,so I'm sure we'll be seeing them in action before too long 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/1824697-adidas-release-japanese-inspired-lion-dog-boots-stars-to-wear-them-this-weekend>
.

• Juventus and Napoli each won 2-0, beating beating Genoa and Torino 
respectively, to stay within five points of Roma. Notably, this was only Juve's 
first home clean-sheet of the season.

Results: Bologna 1-0 Livorno, Catania 0-0 Sassuolo, Chievo 1-2 Fiorentina, 
Inter 4-2 Verona, Juventus 2-0 Genoa, Lazio 2-0 Cagliari, Napoli 2-0 Torino, 
Parma 3-2 Milan, Sampdoria 1-0 Atalanta, Udinese 0-1 Roma.

• Latest Serie A table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball/table>
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/21/Manchester_City_4_0_Borussia_M_nchengladbach__Champions_League___as_it_happened.txt

9.50pm BST 21:50  <> 

Paul Wilson's match report

Agüero hat-trick earns Manchester City win against Borussia Mönchengladbach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-group-c-match-report>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b814e4b05caf65ecd41e%23block-57d9b814e4b05caf65ecd41e>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b814e4b05caf65ecd41e%23block-57d9b814e4b05caf65ecd41e>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b814e4b05caf65ecd41e%23block-57d9b814e4b05caf65ecd41e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b814e4b05caf65ecd41e%23block-57d9b814e4b05caf65ecd41e>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b814e4b05caf65ecd41e%23block-57d9b814e4b05caf65ecd41e>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b814e4b05caf65ecd41e%23block-57d9b814e4b05caf65ecd41e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.37pm BST 21:37  <> 

Full time: Manchester City 4-0 Borussia Mönchengladbach

There’s the final whistle and Pep Guardiola’s first Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> outing with Man City is 
a unqualified success thanks to a Kun Aguero hat trick.

Updated at 9.39pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b4a0e4b067ad30087c34%23block-57d9b4a0e4b067ad30087c34>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b4a0e4b067ad30087c34%23block-57d9b4a0e4b067ad30087c34>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b4a0e4b067ad30087c34%23block-57d9b4a0e4b067ad30087c34&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b4a0e4b067ad30087c34%23block-57d9b4a0e4b067ad30087c34>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b4a0e4b067ad30087c34%23block-57d9b4a0e4b067ad30087c34>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b4a0e4b067ad30087c34%23block-57d9b4a0e4b067ad30087c34&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.35pm BST 21:35  <> 

GOAL! Manchester City 4-0 Borussia Mönchengladbach (Iheanacho, 90 min+1)

Really not much to say about Iheanacho’s tap-in to seal the victory except 
that Gladbach is mentally already on the plane home.
 Manchester City’s Kelechi Iheanacho makes it four. Photograph: Carl 
Recine/Reuters  Manchester City players celebrate whilst the Borussia 
Moenchengladbach players look dejected. Photograph: Richard Heathcote/Getty 
Images 
Updated at 9.52pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b3cfe4b05caf65ecd414%23block-57d9b3cfe4b05caf65ecd414>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b3cfe4b05caf65ecd414%23block-57d9b3cfe4b05caf65ecd414>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b3cfe4b05caf65ecd414%23block-57d9b3cfe4b05caf65ecd414&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b3cfe4b05caf65ecd414%23block-57d9b3cfe4b05caf65ecd414>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b3cfe4b05caf65ecd414%23block-57d9b3cfe4b05caf65ecd414>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b3cfe4b05caf65ecd414%23block-57d9b3cfe4b05caf65ecd414&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.32pm BST 21:32  <> 

90 min: The extended game of keep away continues into the final minute. Fourth 
official has signaled for two minutes of stoppage time.

Updated at 9.32pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b36ee4b05caf65ecd413%23block-57d9b36ee4b05caf65ecd413>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b36ee4b05caf65ecd413%23block-57d9b36ee4b05caf65ecd413>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b36ee4b05caf65ecd413%23block-57d9b36ee4b05caf65ecd413&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b36ee4b05caf65ecd413%23block-57d9b36ee4b05caf65ecd413>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b36ee4b05caf65ecd413%23block-57d9b36ee4b05caf65ecd413>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b36ee4b05caf65ecd413%23block-57d9b36ee4b05caf65ecd413&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.28pm BST 21:28  <> 

86 min: City merely keeping possession now as Gladbach half-heartedly press. 
Playing out the string it seems.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b2d4e4b0e813b694d125%23block-57d9b2d4e4b0e813b694d125>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b2d4e4b0e813b694d125%23block-57d9b2d4e4b0e813b694d125>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b2d4e4b0e813b694d125%23block-57d9b2d4e4b0e813b694d125&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b2d4e4b0e813b694d125%23block-57d9b2d4e4b0e813b694d125>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b2d4e4b0e813b694d125%23block-57d9b2d4e4b0e813b694d125>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b2d4e4b0e813b694d125%23block-57d9b2d4e4b0e813b694d125&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.25pm BST 21:25  <> 

83 min: And now Aguero, who’s caused enough headaches for the visitors 
tonight, exits for Iheanacho. Whew!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b21fe4b05caf65ecd40d%23block-57d9b21fe4b05caf65ecd40d>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b21fe4b05caf65ecd40d%23block-57d9b21fe4b05caf65ecd40d>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b21fe4b05caf65ecd40d%23block-57d9b21fe4b05caf65ecd40d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b21fe4b05caf65ecd40d%23block-57d9b21fe4b05caf65ecd40d>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b21fe4b05caf65ecd40d%23block-57d9b21fe4b05caf65ecd40d>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b21fe4b05caf65ecd40d%23block-57d9b21fe4b05caf65ecd40d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.24pm BST 21:24  <> 

81 min: Now Gundogan leaves to an ovation from the crowd as Clichy comes on. 
Also, Gladbach make their final chance as Stindl enters for Traoré.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b1abe4b067ad30087c29%23block-57d9b1abe4b067ad30087c29>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b1abe4b067ad30087c29%23block-57d9b1abe4b067ad30087c29>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b1abe4b067ad30087c29%23block-57d9b1abe4b067ad30087c29&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b1abe4b067ad30087c29%23block-57d9b1abe4b067ad30087c29>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b1abe4b067ad30087c29%23block-57d9b1abe4b067ad30087c29>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b1abe4b067ad30087c29%23block-57d9b1abe4b067ad30087c29&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.22pm BST 21:22  <> 

80 min: Guardiola makes a switch for City as Sterling exits for Sané.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b157e4b05caf65ecd405%23block-57d9b157e4b05caf65ecd405>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b157e4b05caf65ecd405%23block-57d9b157e4b05caf65ecd405>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b157e4b05caf65ecd405%23block-57d9b157e4b05caf65ecd405&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b157e4b05caf65ecd405%23block-57d9b157e4b05caf65ecd405>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b157e4b05caf65ecd405%23block-57d9b157e4b05caf65ecd405>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b157e4b05caf65ecd405%23block-57d9b157e4b05caf65ecd405&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.21pm BST 21:21  <> 

GOAL! Manchester City 3-0 Borussia Mönchengladbach (Aguero, 77min)

And there’s the hat trick for Kun Aguero, who easily puts home a perfectly 
weighted through ball by Sterling. It’s his second hat trick in Europe this 
year.
 Manchester City’s Sergio Aguero goes around Moenchengladbach’s goalkeeper 
Yann Sommer to score their third goal and complete his hat-trick. Photograph: 
Richard Heathcote/Getty Images  Aguero and his team-mates celebrate. 
Photograph: James Baylis/AMA/Getty Images 
Updated at 9.56pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b0c9e4b067ad30087c23%23block-57d9b0c9e4b067ad30087c23>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b0c9e4b067ad30087c23%23block-57d9b0c9e4b067ad30087c23>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b0c9e4b067ad30087c23%23block-57d9b0c9e4b067ad30087c23&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b0c9e4b067ad30087c23%23block-57d9b0c9e4b067ad30087c23>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b0c9e4b067ad30087c23%23block-57d9b0c9e4b067ad30087c23>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b0c9e4b067ad30087c23%23block-57d9b0c9e4b067ad30087c23&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.18pm BST 21:18  <> 

76 min: Another well struck shot from close range, this one by Navas, but 
Sommer stands tall once more and turns it away.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b082e4b0e813b694d11a%23block-57d9b082e4b0e813b694d11a>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b082e4b0e813b694d11a%23block-57d9b082e4b0e813b694d11a>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b082e4b0e813b694d11a%23block-57d9b082e4b0e813b694d11a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b082e4b0e813b694d11a%23block-57d9b082e4b0e813b694d11a>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b082e4b0e813b694d11a%23block-57d9b082e4b0e813b694d11a>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b082e4b0e813b694d11a%23block-57d9b082e4b0e813b694d11a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.18pm BST 21:18  <> 

74 min: Gundogan, whose debut start for City has gone swimmingly, takes the 
corner but it’s easily cleared. The match seems to have stagnated here.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b01ae4b067ad30087c1e%23block-57d9b01ae4b067ad30087c1e>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b01ae4b067ad30087c1e%23block-57d9b01ae4b067ad30087c1e>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b01ae4b067ad30087c1e%23block-57d9b01ae4b067ad30087c1e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b01ae4b067ad30087c1e%23block-57d9b01ae4b067ad30087c1e>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b01ae4b067ad30087c1e%23block-57d9b01ae4b067ad30087c1e>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b01ae4b067ad30087c1e%23block-57d9b01ae4b067ad30087c1e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.16pm BST 21:16  <> 

73 min: Moments after Kolarov’s shot misses the target, De Bruyne releases 
Sterling once more and he’s got Sommer in a one-on-one breakaway. Tries it slot 
it through the keeper’s legs but it’s deflected out for a corner.
 Manchester City’s Raheem Sterling is denied by Yann Sommer. Photograph: Carl 
Recine/Reuters 
Updated at 9.24pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9afb3e4b067ad30087c1b%23block-57d9afb3e4b067ad30087c1b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9afb3e4b067ad30087c1b%23block-57d9afb3e4b067ad30087c1b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9afb3e4b067ad30087c1b%23block-57d9afb3e4b067ad30087c1b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9afb3e4b067ad30087c1b%23block-57d9afb3e4b067ad30087c1b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9afb3e4b067ad30087c1b%23block-57d9afb3e4b067ad30087c1b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9afb3e4b067ad30087c1b%23block-57d9afb3e4b067ad30087c1b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.14pm BST 21:14  <> 

68 min: Pausing from the onslaught to leaf through reader submissions, here’s 
an email from PS Calder:

The Guardian can’t have it both ways: writing articles about the boring 
predictability of the CL first round then poking fun at City for not selling 
out a postponed fixture.

You lads really are a bunch of muppets.

Keenly observed on multiple levels.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aeafe4b05caf65ecd3f3%23block-57d9aeafe4b05caf65ecd3f3>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aeafe4b05caf65ecd3f3%23block-57d9aeafe4b05caf65ecd3f3>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aeafe4b05caf65ecd3f3%23block-57d9aeafe4b05caf65ecd3f3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aeafe4b05caf65ecd3f3%23block-57d9aeafe4b05caf65ecd3f3>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aeafe4b05caf65ecd3f3%23block-57d9aeafe4b05caf65ecd3f3>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aeafe4b05caf65ecd3f3%23block-57d9aeafe4b05caf65ecd3f3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.08pm BST 21:08  <> 

66 min: Now it’s Zabaleta who has a go but his shot is off target. That’s 13 
total attempts for City compared to three for Gladbach. One-way traffic.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ae08e4b067ad30087c10%23block-57d9ae08e4b067ad30087c10>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ae08e4b067ad30087c10%23block-57d9ae08e4b067ad30087c10>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ae08e4b067ad30087c10%23block-57d9ae08e4b067ad30087c10&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ae08e4b067ad30087c10%23block-57d9ae08e4b067ad30087c10>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ae08e4b067ad30087c10%23block-57d9ae08e4b067ad30087c10>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ae08e4b067ad30087c10%23block-57d9ae08e4b067ad30087c10&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.07pm BST 21:07  <> 

64 min: Another shot by De Bruyne but Sommer makes the save comfortably. (What 
did we say earlier about déjà vu?)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9adc7e4b0e813b694d10b%23block-57d9adc7e4b0e813b694d10b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9adc7e4b0e813b694d10b%23block-57d9adc7e4b0e813b694d10b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9adc7e4b0e813b694d10b%23block-57d9adc7e4b0e813b694d10b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9adc7e4b0e813b694d10b%23block-57d9adc7e4b0e813b694d10b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9adc7e4b0e813b694d10b%23block-57d9adc7e4b0e813b694d10b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9adc7e4b0e813b694d10b%23block-57d9adc7e4b0e813b694d10b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.06pm BST 21:06  <> 

61 min: Another shot by De Bruyne but Sommer makes the save comfortably.
 Manchester City’s Kevin De Bruyne, right takes the ball past 
Moenchengladbach’s Julian Korb as he attempts to find space for a shot. 
Photograph: Dave Thompson/AP 
Updated at 9.21pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ad73e4b067ad30087c09%23block-57d9ad73e4b067ad30087c09>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ad73e4b067ad30087c09%23block-57d9ad73e4b067ad30087c09>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ad73e4b067ad30087c09%23block-57d9ad73e4b067ad30087c09&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ad73e4b067ad30087c09%23block-57d9ad73e4b067ad30087c09>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ad73e4b067ad30087c09%23block-57d9ad73e4b067ad30087c09>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ad73e4b067ad30087c09%23block-57d9ad73e4b067ad30087c09&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.04pm BST 21:04  <> 

59 min: Moments after Otamendi’s attempt sails over the bar, Gladbach make 
their second switch as Hazard enters for Hahn.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ad22e4b067ad30087c06%23block-57d9ad22e4b067ad30087c06>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ad22e4b067ad30087c06%23block-57d9ad22e4b067ad30087c06>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ad22e4b067ad30087c06%23block-57d9ad22e4b067ad30087c06&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ad22e4b067ad30087c06%23block-57d9ad22e4b067ad30087c06>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ad22e4b067ad30087c06%23block-57d9ad22e4b067ad30087c06>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ad22e4b067ad30087c06%23block-57d9ad22e4b067ad30087c06&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.03pm BST 21:03  <> 

57 min: Another Man City shot blocked. The deluge continues. Substitutions 
coming up.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9acc5e4b067ad30087c03%23block-57d9acc5e4b067ad30087c03>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9acc5e4b067ad30087c03%23block-57d9acc5e4b067ad30087c03>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9acc5e4b067ad30087c03%23block-57d9acc5e4b067ad30087c03&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9acc5e4b067ad30087c03%23block-57d9acc5e4b067ad30087c03>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9acc5e4b067ad30087c03%23block-57d9acc5e4b067ad30087c03>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9acc5e4b067ad30087c03%23block-57d9acc5e4b067ad30087c03&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.00pm BST 21:00  <> 

53 min: Another chance for City set up by De Bruyne who releases Jesus Navas, 
but the Spanish winger’s shot caroms off a defender. The official attendance 
figure seems like honest accounting: 30,217.
Chris Williams (@chrisjw27) 
official attendance at the Etihad is 30,217 at their 60,000 seater stadium. 
pathetic. absolutely pathetic.#Emptihad 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Emptihad?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/chrisjw27/status/776148437930762240> September 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/chrisjw27/status/776148437930762240> 
Updated at 9.05pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9abdee4b067ad30087c00%23block-57d9abdee4b067ad30087c00>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9abdee4b067ad30087c00%23block-57d9abdee4b067ad30087c00>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9abdee4b067ad30087c00%23block-57d9abdee4b067ad30087c00&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9abdee4b067ad30087c00%23block-57d9abdee4b067ad30087c00>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9abdee4b067ad30087c00%23block-57d9abdee4b067ad30087c00>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9abdee4b067ad30087c00%23block-57d9abdee4b067ad30087c00&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.55pm BST 20:55  <> 

50 min: Aguero nearly makes it a hat trick but his effort off a Sterling 
cut-back is turned away by Sommer, who has had a series of massive saves today.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ab0ee4b067ad30087bfb%23block-57d9ab0ee4b067ad30087bfb>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ab0ee4b067ad30087bfb%23block-57d9ab0ee4b067ad30087bfb>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ab0ee4b067ad30087bfb%23block-57d9ab0ee4b067ad30087bfb&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ab0ee4b067ad30087bfb%23block-57d9ab0ee4b067ad30087bfb>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ab0ee4b067ad30087bfb%23block-57d9ab0ee4b067ad30087bfb>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ab0ee4b067ad30087bfb%23block-57d9ab0ee4b067ad30087bfb&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.54pm BST 20:54  <> 

48 min: Otamendi shown yellow after ripping down Raffael near the halfway line.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aad2e4b067ad30087bf9%23block-57d9aad2e4b067ad30087bf9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aad2e4b067ad30087bf9%23block-57d9aad2e4b067ad30087bf9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aad2e4b067ad30087bf9%23block-57d9aad2e4b067ad30087bf9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aad2e4b067ad30087bf9%23block-57d9aad2e4b067ad30087bf9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aad2e4b067ad30087bf9%23block-57d9aad2e4b067ad30087bf9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aad2e4b067ad30087bf9%23block-57d9aad2e4b067ad30087bf9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.53pm BST 20:53  <> 

46 min: And they’re off in the second half!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aaa4e4b0e813b694d0f5%23block-57d9aaa4e4b0e813b694d0f5>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aaa4e4b0e813b694d0f5%23block-57d9aaa4e4b0e813b694d0f5>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aaa4e4b0e813b694d0f5%23block-57d9aaa4e4b0e813b694d0f5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aaa4e4b0e813b694d0f5%23block-57d9aaa4e4b0e813b694d0f5>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aaa4e4b0e813b694d0f5%23block-57d9aaa4e4b0e813b694d0f5>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9aaa4e4b0e813b694d0f5%23block-57d9aaa4e4b0e813b694d0f5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.35pm BST 20:35  <> 

Half-time: Manchester City 2-0 Borussia Mönchengladbach

City in clear control here as the teams head to the locker rooms. Will be 
interesting to see André Schubert’s tinkering can yield dividends after the 
break.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a5a0e4b067ad30087bde%23block-57d9a5a0e4b067ad30087bde>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a5a0e4b067ad30087bde%23block-57d9a5a0e4b067ad30087bde>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a5a0e4b067ad30087bde%23block-57d9a5a0e4b067ad30087bde&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a5a0e4b067ad30087bde%23block-57d9a5a0e4b067ad30087bde>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a5a0e4b067ad30087bde%23block-57d9a5a0e4b067ad30087bde>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a5a0e4b067ad30087bde%23block-57d9a5a0e4b067ad30087bde&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.31pm BST 20:31  <> 

45 min: Sterling, with the ball on the edge of the area, somehow escapes two 
oncoming defenders and plays back to Aguero, whose shot sails over the 
crossbar. One minute of stoppage time forthcoming.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a535e4b067ad30087bd8%23block-57d9a535e4b067ad30087bd8>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a535e4b067ad30087bd8%23block-57d9a535e4b067ad30087bd8>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a535e4b067ad30087bd8%23block-57d9a535e4b067ad30087bd8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a535e4b067ad30087bd8%23block-57d9a535e4b067ad30087bd8>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a535e4b067ad30087bd8%23block-57d9a535e4b067ad30087bd8>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a535e4b067ad30087bd8%23block-57d9a535e4b067ad30087bd8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.29pm BST 20:29  <> 

44 min: City on the attack again. They’re dispossessed and Gladbach throw 
numbers forward but it’s booted forward and easily corralled by Bravo.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a504e4b05caf65ecd3c4%23block-57d9a504e4b05caf65ecd3c4>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a504e4b05caf65ecd3c4%23block-57d9a504e4b05caf65ecd3c4>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a504e4b05caf65ecd3c4%23block-57d9a504e4b05caf65ecd3c4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a504e4b05caf65ecd3c4%23block-57d9a504e4b05caf65ecd3c4>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a504e4b05caf65ecd3c4%23block-57d9a504e4b05caf65ecd3c4>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a504e4b05caf65ecd3c4%23block-57d9a504e4b05caf65ecd3c4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.27pm BST 20:27  <> 

42 min: A cracker of a shot by Stindl and Claudio Bravo makes a hair-trigger 
save!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a49ee4b0e813b694d0db%23block-57d9a49ee4b0e813b694d0db>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a49ee4b0e813b694d0db%23block-57d9a49ee4b0e813b694d0db>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a49ee4b0e813b694d0db%23block-57d9a49ee4b0e813b694d0db&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a49ee4b0e813b694d0db%23block-57d9a49ee4b0e813b694d0db>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a49ee4b0e813b694d0db%23block-57d9a49ee4b0e813b694d0db>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a49ee4b0e813b694d0db%23block-57d9a49ee4b0e813b694d0db&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.27pm BST 20:27  <> 

41 min: A corner for Gladbach. Might this be the opportunity they need to get 
back into the match?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a486e4b067ad30087bd5%23block-57d9a486e4b067ad30087bd5>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a486e4b067ad30087bd5%23block-57d9a486e4b067ad30087bd5>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a486e4b067ad30087bd5%23block-57d9a486e4b067ad30087bd5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a486e4b067ad30087bd5%23block-57d9a486e4b067ad30087bd5>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a486e4b067ad30087bd5%23block-57d9a486e4b067ad30087bd5>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a486e4b067ad30087bd5%23block-57d9a486e4b067ad30087bd5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.25pm BST 20:25  <> 

38 min: A tactical substitution here as Julian Korb comes on for Christoph 
Kramer as Gladbach switches to a back four.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a3f6e4b067ad30087bd0%23block-57d9a3f6e4b067ad30087bd0>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a3f6e4b067ad30087bd0%23block-57d9a3f6e4b067ad30087bd0>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a3f6e4b067ad30087bd0%23block-57d9a3f6e4b067ad30087bd0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a3f6e4b067ad30087bd0%23block-57d9a3f6e4b067ad30087bd0>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a3f6e4b067ad30087bd0%23block-57d9a3f6e4b067ad30087bd0>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a3f6e4b067ad30087bd0%23block-57d9a3f6e4b067ad30087bd0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.21pm BST 20:21  <> 

34 min: Moments after Stindl’s shot is blocked, only Gladbach’s second attempt 
of the day, the visitors win a corner. Raffael takes it and it’s easily cleared.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a2d4e4b05caf65ecd3bd%23block-57d9a2d4e4b05caf65ecd3bd>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a2d4e4b05caf65ecd3bd%23block-57d9a2d4e4b05caf65ecd3bd>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a2d4e4b05caf65ecd3bd%23block-57d9a2d4e4b05caf65ecd3bd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a2d4e4b05caf65ecd3bd%23block-57d9a2d4e4b05caf65ecd3bd>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a2d4e4b05caf65ecd3bd%23block-57d9a2d4e4b05caf65ecd3bd>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a2d4e4b05caf65ecd3bd%23block-57d9a2d4e4b05caf65ecd3bd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.18pm BST 20:18  <> 

30 min: No rest for the weary. Another attempt on goal by Gundogan, a 
speculative attempt that misses the mark. Why not at this point?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a26fe4b05caf65ecd3b8%23block-57d9a26fe4b05caf65ecd3b8>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a26fe4b05caf65ecd3b8%23block-57d9a26fe4b05caf65ecd3b8>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a26fe4b05caf65ecd3b8%23block-57d9a26fe4b05caf65ecd3b8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a26fe4b05caf65ecd3b8%23block-57d9a26fe4b05caf65ecd3b8>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a26fe4b05caf65ecd3b8%23block-57d9a26fe4b05caf65ecd3b8>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a26fe4b05caf65ecd3b8%23block-57d9a26fe4b05caf65ecd3b8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.15pm BST 20:15  <> 

GOAL! Manchester City 2-0 Borussia Mönchengladbach (Aguero, 28 min)

Aguero sends the keeper the wrong direction, slots it home and has a brace 
inside a half hour to lift City to a 2-nil advantage. That’s 13 goals in his 
last 12 starts.
 Sergio Aguero takes the penalty kick ... Photograph: Alex Livesey/Getty Images
 And sends Yann Sommer the wrong way to get his, and City’s, second of the 
night. Photograph: Dave Thompson/AP 
Updated at 8.25pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a175e4b067ad30087bc6%23block-57d9a175e4b067ad30087bc6>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a175e4b067ad30087bc6%23block-57d9a175e4b067ad30087bc6>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a175e4b067ad30087bc6%23block-57d9a175e4b067ad30087bc6&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a175e4b067ad30087bc6%23block-57d9a175e4b067ad30087bc6>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a175e4b067ad30087bc6%23block-57d9a175e4b067ad30087bc6>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a175e4b067ad30087bc6%23block-57d9a175e4b067ad30087bc6&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.13pm BST 20:13  <> 

27 min: Kramer trips up Gundogan just inside the area and the referee points 
to the spot! The young German is shown yellow and Aguero will take the penalty.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a10ce4b0e813b694d0cd%23block-57d9a10ce4b0e813b694d0cd>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a10ce4b0e813b694d0cd%23block-57d9a10ce4b0e813b694d0cd>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a10ce4b0e813b694d0cd%23block-57d9a10ce4b0e813b694d0cd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a10ce4b0e813b694d0cd%23block-57d9a10ce4b0e813b694d0cd>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a10ce4b0e813b694d0cd%23block-57d9a10ce4b0e813b694d0cd>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a10ce4b0e813b694d0cd%23block-57d9a10ce4b0e813b694d0cd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.12pm BST 20:12  <> 

26 min: More verve from Gladbach here as they swing it across the pitch and 
find Raffael, who’s attempt from inside the area is blocked by Stones.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a0bce4b0e813b694d0cb%23block-57d9a0bce4b0e813b694d0cb>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a0bce4b0e813b694d0cb%23block-57d9a0bce4b0e813b694d0cb>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a0bce4b0e813b694d0cb%23block-57d9a0bce4b0e813b694d0cb&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a0bce4b0e813b694d0cb%23block-57d9a0bce4b0e813b694d0cb>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a0bce4b0e813b694d0cb%23block-57d9a0bce4b0e813b694d0cb>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a0bce4b0e813b694d0cb%23block-57d9a0bce4b0e813b694d0cb&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.10pm BST 20:10  <> 

22 min: Gladbach win their first corner and Raffael takes it. It’s flicked 
toward goal but goes out for another corner that’s easily cleared.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a056e4b0e813b694d0c9%23block-57d9a056e4b0e813b694d0c9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a056e4b0e813b694d0c9%23block-57d9a056e4b0e813b694d0c9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a056e4b0e813b694d0c9%23block-57d9a056e4b0e813b694d0c9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a056e4b0e813b694d0c9%23block-57d9a056e4b0e813b694d0c9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a056e4b0e813b694d0c9%23block-57d9a056e4b0e813b694d0c9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9a056e4b0e813b694d0c9%23block-57d9a056e4b0e813b694d0c9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.08pm BST 20:08  <> 

19 min: Two quick corners for City, both taken by De Bruyne and both coming to 
nothing. Lots of comments on the fans disguised as empty seats today.
Prateek Chadha (@PrateekKChadha) 
@BryanAGraham <https://twitter.com/BryanAGraham> Is it just a set of 
unflattering TV shots or are there a bunch of seats empty at City's stadium?#MBM
 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/MBM?src=hash> #DidEveryoneGoToWembley 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/DidEveryoneGoToWembley?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/PrateekKChadha/status/776134278346182656> September 14, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/PrateekKChadha/status/776134278346182656> 
It doesn’t look pretty.
Empty Seats Galore (@EmptySeatsPics) 
Man City-Monchengladbach game, originally scheduled for yesterday. #UCL 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/UCL?src=hash> (https://t.co/akuNXreL44 
<https://t.co/akuNXreL44>) pic.twitter.com/dGRi9VSqYf <https://t.co/dGRi9VSqYf>
 <https://twitter.com/EmptySeatsPics/status/776134207357722624> September 14, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/EmptySeatsPics/status/776134207357722624> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99fafe4b067ad30087bc1%23block-57d99fafe4b067ad30087bc1>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99fafe4b067ad30087bc1%23block-57d99fafe4b067ad30087bc1>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99fafe4b067ad30087bc1%23block-57d99fafe4b067ad30087bc1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99fafe4b067ad30087bc1%23block-57d99fafe4b067ad30087bc1>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99fafe4b067ad30087bc1%23block-57d99fafe4b067ad30087bc1>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99fafe4b067ad30087bc1%23block-57d99fafe4b067ad30087bc1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.04pm BST 20:04  <> 

17 min: Gladbach have yet to find their footing here and have hardly been able 
to keep City at bay, let alone create any attempts of their own. Even merely 
keeping possession for a minute or so in City’s half, as they’re doing right 
now, feels like a victory.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99ee1e4b0e813b694d0c4%23block-57d99ee1e4b0e813b694d0c4>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99ee1e4b0e813b694d0c4%23block-57d99ee1e4b0e813b694d0c4>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99ee1e4b0e813b694d0c4%23block-57d99ee1e4b0e813b694d0c4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99ee1e4b0e813b694d0c4%23block-57d99ee1e4b0e813b694d0c4>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99ee1e4b0e813b694d0c4%23block-57d99ee1e4b0e813b694d0c4>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99ee1e4b0e813b694d0c4%23block-57d99ee1e4b0e813b694d0c4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.00pm BST 20:00  <> 

14 min: Another corner for City. De Bruyne’s corner is poorly cleared by 
Gladbach and Fernandinho winds up with a shot that misses the target.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99e1ce4b067ad30087bbb%23block-57d99e1ce4b067ad30087bbb>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99e1ce4b067ad30087bbb%23block-57d99e1ce4b067ad30087bbb>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99e1ce4b067ad30087bbb%23block-57d99e1ce4b067ad30087bbb&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99e1ce4b067ad30087bbb%23block-57d99e1ce4b067ad30087bbb>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99e1ce4b067ad30087bbb%23block-57d99e1ce4b067ad30087bbb>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99e1ce4b067ad30087bbb%23block-57d99e1ce4b067ad30087bbb&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.59pm BST 19:59  <> 

12 min: How near City came to making it two! A lightning-quick counter-attack 
off a dispossession as De Bruyne finds Aguero who serves to Gundogan, who’s 
shot is turned away by a fully extended Sommer. City in fine form here running 
rampant.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99d95e4b0e813b694d0c0%23block-57d99d95e4b0e813b694d0c0>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99d95e4b0e813b694d0c0%23block-57d99d95e4b0e813b694d0c0>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99d95e4b0e813b694d0c0%23block-57d99d95e4b0e813b694d0c0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99d95e4b0e813b694d0c0%23block-57d99d95e4b0e813b694d0c0>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99d95e4b0e813b694d0c0%23block-57d99d95e4b0e813b694d0c0>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99d95e4b0e813b694d0c0%23block-57d99d95e4b0e813b694d0c0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.57pm BST 19:57  <> 

GOAL! Manchester City 1-0 Borussia Mönchengladbach (Aguero, 9 min)

Kolarov sends a low cross into the box from the left side of the area and 
Aguero darts in front of Christensen at the near post to turn it in. A dream 
start for the hosts.
 Manchester City’s Sergio Aguero nips in to open the scoring. Photograph: Phil 
Noble/Reuters  The Etihad erupts as Aguero wheels away in celebration after 
opening the scoring. Photograph: Oli Scarff/AFP/Getty Images 
Updated at 8.10pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99d0ee4b05caf65ecd390%23block-57d99d0ee4b05caf65ecd390>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99d0ee4b05caf65ecd390%23block-57d99d0ee4b05caf65ecd390>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99d0ee4b05caf65ecd390%23block-57d99d0ee4b05caf65ecd390&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99d0ee4b05caf65ecd390%23block-57d99d0ee4b05caf65ecd390>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99d0ee4b05caf65ecd390%23block-57d99d0ee4b05caf65ecd390>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99d0ee4b05caf65ecd390%23block-57d99d0ee4b05caf65ecd390&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.54pm BST 19:54  <> 

7 min: Gladbach pressing high when City are backed in own third while the 
hosts continue to play long balls over the defense.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99cade4b0e813b694d0bc%23block-57d99cade4b0e813b694d0bc>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99cade4b0e813b694d0bc%23block-57d99cade4b0e813b694d0bc>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99cade4b0e813b694d0bc%23block-57d99cade4b0e813b694d0bc&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99cade4b0e813b694d0bc%23block-57d99cade4b0e813b694d0bc>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99cade4b0e813b694d0bc%23block-57d99cade4b0e813b694d0bc>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99cade4b0e813b694d0bc%23block-57d99cade4b0e813b694d0bc&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.52pm BST 19:52  <> 

6 min: De Bruyne whips in the corner but it’s easily corralled by Sommer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99c34e4b05caf65ecd38b%23block-57d99c34e4b05caf65ecd38b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99c34e4b05caf65ecd38b%23block-57d99c34e4b05caf65ecd38b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99c34e4b05caf65ecd38b%23block-57d99c34e4b05caf65ecd38b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99c34e4b05caf65ecd38b%23block-57d99c34e4b05caf65ecd38b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99c34e4b05caf65ecd38b%23block-57d99c34e4b05caf65ecd38b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99c34e4b05caf65ecd38b%23block-57d99c34e4b05caf65ecd38b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.51pm BST 19:51  <> 

5 min: Bit of a slow opening for both sides with nothing even resembling a 
threat until City win a corner nearly five full minutes in.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99c00e4b067ad30087baa%23block-57d99c00e4b067ad30087baa>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99c00e4b067ad30087baa%23block-57d99c00e4b067ad30087baa>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99c00e4b067ad30087baa%23block-57d99c00e4b067ad30087baa&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99c00e4b067ad30087baa%23block-57d99c00e4b067ad30087baa>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99c00e4b067ad30087baa%23block-57d99c00e4b067ad30087baa>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99c00e4b067ad30087baa%23block-57d99c00e4b067ad30087baa&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.48pm BST 19:48  <> 

1 min: And we’re off! City attacking from left to right in traditional home 
kits, Gladbach from right to left in the all-black third strip.

Updated at 7.48pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99af3e4b05caf65ecd386%23block-57d99af3e4b05caf65ecd386>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99af3e4b05caf65ecd386%23block-57d99af3e4b05caf65ecd386>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99af3e4b05caf65ecd386%23block-57d99af3e4b05caf65ecd386&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99af3e4b05caf65ecd386%23block-57d99af3e4b05caf65ecd386>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99af3e4b05caf65ecd386%23block-57d99af3e4b05caf65ecd386>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99af3e4b05caf65ecd386%23block-57d99af3e4b05caf65ecd386&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.43pm BST 19:43  <> 

And the players are emerging from the tunnel as the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> anthem rings through the 
ground. Not much longer now.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99a0be4b067ad30087ba2%23block-57d99a0be4b067ad30087ba2>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99a0be4b067ad30087ba2%23block-57d99a0be4b067ad30087ba2>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99a0be4b067ad30087ba2%23block-57d99a0be4b067ad30087ba2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99a0be4b067ad30087ba2%23block-57d99a0be4b067ad30087ba2>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99a0be4b067ad30087ba2%23block-57d99a0be4b067ad30087ba2>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99a0be4b067ad30087ba2%23block-57d99a0be4b067ad30087ba2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.32pm BST 19:32  <> 

The teams!

Here’s a look at the teams for today’s match at the Etihad Stadium.

Man City

XI: Bravo; Zabaleta, Stones, Otamendi, Kolarov; Gundogan, Fernandinho; Navas, 
De Bruyne, Sterling; Aguero

Subs: Caballero, Sagna, Nolito, Sane, Clichy, Iheanacho, Angelino

Gladbach

XI: Sommer; Elvedi, Christensen, Strobl; Kramer, Dahoud, Johnson, Wendt; 
Stindl; Raffael, Hahn

Subs: Vestergaard, Hazard, Traore, Sippel, Hofmann, Jantschke, Korb

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99706e4b05caf65ecd36c%23block-57d99706e4b05caf65ecd36c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99706e4b05caf65ecd36c%23block-57d99706e4b05caf65ecd36c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99706e4b05caf65ecd36c%23block-57d99706e4b05caf65ecd36c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99706e4b05caf65ecd36c%23block-57d99706e4b05caf65ecd36c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99706e4b05caf65ecd36c%23block-57d99706e4b05caf65ecd36c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d99706e4b05caf65ecd36c%23block-57d99706e4b05caf65ecd36c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.29pm BST 19:29  <> 

Hello and welcome to today’s Champions League group-stage match between 
Manchester City and VfL Borussia Mönchengladbach. If this fixture feels like 
déjà vu, it’s either because it wasmeant to go off yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-postponed>
 before weather got in the way or because the sides met in the group stage of 
last year’s competition with City winning both matches.

Nonetheless, Pep Guardiola’s first Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> match as City’s manager 
is finally upon us and the Spaniard is not underestimating the Bundesliga side.

Gladbach are a brave team, one of the best teams in Europe right now. They 
have a lot of quality. The draw was difficult for us. They beat me many times 
[two of the last four meetings, the other two were draws] and they are 
aggressive. They make the game one-on-one in the build-up and when that happens 
it is a fight, man to man. With the ball they are so, so intelligent.

Plenty more to come with kickoff roughly a quarter hour from now.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9940de4b0e813b694d09b%23block-57d9940de4b0e813b694d09b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9940de4b0e813b694d09b%23block-57d9940de4b0e813b694d09b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9940de4b0e813b694d09b%23block-57d9940de4b0e813b694d09b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9940de4b0e813b694d09b%23block-57d9940de4b0e813b694d09b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9940de4b0e813b694d09b%23block-57d9940de4b0e813b694d09b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9940de4b0e813b694d09b%23block-57d9940de4b0e813b694d09b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.59pm BST 17:59  <> 

Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime, here’s how Borussia 
Mönchengladbach entertained themselvesafter Tuesday night’s postponement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-postponed>
.
Borussia Mönchengladbach players lead ‘thunder clap’ in Manchester rain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/14/borussia-monchengladbach-manchester-city-champions-league-thunder-clap-video>
. 
Manchester City v Borussia Mönchengladbach tie postponed until Wednesday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-postponed>
How it went down last night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/13/manchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live>
.
 Yikes! Photograph: Laurence Griffiths/Getty Images 
Updated at 6.06pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d981cee4b0e813b694d054%23block-57d981cee4b0e813b694d054>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d981cee4b0e813b694d054%23block-57d981cee4b0e813b694d054>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d981cee4b0e813b694d054%23block-57d981cee4b0e813b694d054&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d981cee4b0e813b694d054%23block-57d981cee4b0e813b694d054>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%204-0%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach%3A%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d981cee4b0e813b694d054%23block-57d981cee4b0e813b694d054>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d981cee4b0e813b694d054%23block-57d981cee4b0e813b694d054&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
Agüero hat-trick earns Manchester City win against Borussia Mönchengladbach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-group-c-match-report> 
There’s the final whistle and Pep Guardiola’s first Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> outing with Man City is 
a unqualified success thanks to a Kun Aguero hat trick.
 
Really not much to say about Iheanacho’s tap-in to seal the victory except 
that Gladbach is mentally already on the plane home.
 Manchester City’s Kelechi Iheanacho makes it four. Photograph: Carl 
Recine/Reuters  Manchester City players celebrate whilst the Borussia 
Moenchengladbach players look dejected. Photograph: Richard Heathcote/Getty 
Images  
90 min: The extended game of keep away continues into the final minute. Fourth 
official has signaled for two minutes of stoppage time.
 
86 min: City merely keeping possession now as Gladbach half-heartedly press. 
Playing out the string it seems.
 
83 min: And now Aguero, who’s caused enough headaches for the visitors 
tonight, exits for Iheanacho. Whew!
 
81 min: Now Gundogan leaves to an ovation from the crowd as Clichy comes on. 
Also, Gladbach make their final chance as Stindl enters for Traoré.
 
80 min: Guardiola makes a switch for City as Sterling exits for Sané.
 
And there’s the hat trick for Kun Aguero, who easily puts home a perfectly 
weighted through ball by Sterling. It’s his second hat trick in Europe this 
year.
 Manchester City’s Sergio Aguero goes around Moenchengladbach’s goalkeeper 
Yann Sommer to score their third goal and complete his hat-trick. Photograph: 
Richard Heathcote/Getty Images  Aguero and his team-mates celebrate. 
Photograph: James Baylis/AMA/Getty Images  
76 min: Another well struck shot from close range, this one by Navas, but 
Sommer stands tall once more and turns it away.
 
74 min: Gundogan, whose debut start for City has gone swimmingly, takes the 
corner but it’s easily cleared. The match seems to have stagnated here.
 
73 min: Moments after Kolarov’s shot misses the target, De Bruyne releases 
Sterling once more and he’s got Sommer in a one-on-one breakaway. Tries it slot 
it through the keeper’s legs but it’s deflected out for a corner.
 Manchester City’s Raheem Sterling is denied by Yann Sommer. Photograph: Carl 
Recine/Reuters  
68 min: Pausing from the onslaught to leaf through reader submissions, here’s 
an email from PS Calder:

The Guardian can’t have it both ways: writing articles about the boring 
predictability of the CL first round then poking fun at City for not selling 
out a postponed fixture.

You lads really are a bunch of muppets.

Keenly observed on multiple levels.
 
66 min: Now it’s Zabaleta who has a go but his shot is off target. That’s 13 
total attempts for City compared to three for Gladbach. One-way traffic.
 
64 min: Another shot by De Bruyne but Sommer makes the save comfortably. (What 
did we say earlier about déjà vu?)
 
61 min: Another shot by De Bruyne but Sommer makes the save comfortably.
 Manchester City’s Kevin De Bruyne, right takes the ball past 
Moenchengladbach’s Julian Korb as he attempts to find space for a shot. 
Photograph: Dave Thompson/AP  
59 min: Moments after Otamendi’s attempt sails over the bar, Gladbach make 
their second switch as Hazard enters for Hahn.
 
57 min: Another Man City shot blocked. The deluge continues. Substitutions 
coming up.
 
53 min: Another chance for City set up by De Bruyne who releases Jesus Navas, 
but the Spanish winger’s shot caroms off a defender. The official attendance 
figure seems like honest accounting: 30,217.
Chris Williams (@chrisjw27) 
official attendance at the Etihad is 30,217 at their 60,000 seater stadium. 
pathetic. absolutely pathetic.#Emptihad 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Emptihad?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/chrisjw27/status/776148437930762240> September 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/chrisjw27/status/776148437930762240>  
50 min: Aguero nearly makes it a hat trick but his effort off a Sterling 
cut-back is turned away by Sommer, who has had a series of massive saves today.
 
48 min: Otamendi shown yellow after ripping down Raffael near the halfway line.
 
46 min: And they’re off in the second half!
 
City in clear control here as the teams head to the locker rooms. Will be 
interesting to see André Schubert’s tinkering can yield dividends after the 
break.
 
45 min: Sterling, with the ball on the edge of the area, somehow escapes two 
oncoming defenders and plays back to Aguero, whose shot sails over the 
crossbar. One minute of stoppage time forthcoming.
 
44 min: City on the attack again. They’re dispossessed and Gladbach throw 
numbers forward but it’s booted forward and easily corralled by Bravo.
 
42 min: A cracker of a shot by Stindl and Claudio Bravo makes a hair-trigger 
save!
 
41 min: A corner for Gladbach. Might this be the opportunity they need to get 
back into the match?
 
38 min: A tactical substitution here as Julian Korb comes on for Christoph 
Kramer as Gladbach switches to a back four.
 
34 min: Moments after Stindl’s shot is blocked, only Gladbach’s second attempt 
of the day, the visitors win a corner. Raffael takes it and it’s easily cleared.
 
30 min: No rest for the weary. Another attempt on goal by Gundogan, a 
speculative attempt that misses the mark. Why not at this point?
 
Aguero sends the keeper the wrong direction, slots it home and has a brace 
inside a half hour to lift City to a 2-nil advantage. That’s 13 goals in his 
last 12 starts.
 Sergio Aguero takes the penalty kick ... Photograph: Alex Livesey/Getty Images
 And sends Yann Sommer the wrong way to get his, and City’s, second of the 
night. Photograph: Dave Thompson/AP  
27 min: Kramer trips up Gundogan just inside the area and the referee points 
to the spot! The young German is shown yellow and Aguero will take the penalty.
 
26 min: More verve from Gladbach here as they swing it across the pitch and 
find Raffael, who’s attempt from inside the area is blocked by Stones.
 
22 min: Gladbach win their first corner and Raffael takes it. It’s flicked 
toward goal but goes out for another corner that’s easily cleared.
 
19 min: Two quick corners for City, both taken by De Bruyne and both coming to 
nothing. Lots of comments on the fans disguised as empty seats today.
Prateek Chadha (@PrateekKChadha) 
@BryanAGraham <https://twitter.com/BryanAGraham> Is it just a set of 
unflattering TV shots or are there a bunch of seats empty at City's stadium?#MBM
 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/MBM?src=hash> #DidEveryoneGoToWembley 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/DidEveryoneGoToWembley?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/PrateekKChadha/status/776134278346182656> September 14, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/PrateekKChadha/status/776134278346182656> 
It doesn’t look pretty.
Empty Seats Galore (@EmptySeatsPics) 
Man City-Monchengladbach game, originally scheduled for yesterday. #UCL 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/UCL?src=hash> (https://t.co/akuNXreL44 
<https://t.co/akuNXreL44>) pic.twitter.com/dGRi9VSqYf <https://t.co/dGRi9VSqYf>
 <https://twitter.com/EmptySeatsPics/status/776134207357722624> September 14, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/EmptySeatsPics/status/776134207357722624>  
17 min: Gladbach have yet to find their footing here and have hardly been able 
to keep City at bay, let alone create any attempts of their own. Even merely 
keeping possession for a minute or so in City’s half, as they’re doing right 
now, feels like a victory.
 
14 min: Another corner for City. De Bruyne’s corner is poorly cleared by 
Gladbach and Fernandinho winds up with a shot that misses the target.
 
12 min: How near City came to making it two! A lightning-quick counter-attack 
off a dispossession as De Bruyne finds Aguero who serves to Gundogan, who’s 
shot is turned away by a fully extended Sommer. City in fine form here running 
rampant.
 
Kolarov sends a low cross into the box from the left side of the area and 
Aguero darts in front of Christensen at the near post to turn it in. A dream 
start for the hosts.
 Manchester City’s Sergio Aguero nips in to open the scoring. Photograph: Phil 
Noble/Reuters  The Etihad erupts as Aguero wheels away in celebration after 
opening the scoring. Photograph: Oli Scarff/AFP/Getty Images  
7 min: Gladbach pressing high when City are backed in own third while the 
hosts continue to play long balls over the defense.
 
6 min: De Bruyne whips in the corner but it’s easily corralled by Sommer.
 
5 min: Bit of a slow opening for both sides with nothing even resembling a 
threat until City win a corner nearly five full minutes in.
 
1 min: And we’re off! City attacking from left to right in traditional home 
kits, Gladbach from right to left in the all-black third strip.
 
And the players are emerging from the tunnel as the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> anthem rings through the 
ground. Not much longer now.
 
Here’s a look at the teams for today’s match at the Etihad Stadium.

Man City

XI: Bravo; Zabaleta, Stones, Otamendi, Kolarov; Gundogan, Fernandinho; Navas, 
De Bruyne, Sterling; Aguero

Subs: Caballero, Sagna, Nolito, Sane, Clichy, Iheanacho, Angelino

Gladbach

XI: Sommer; Elvedi, Christensen, Strobl; Kramer, Dahoud, Johnson, Wendt; 
Stindl; Raffael, Hahn

Subs: Vestergaard, Hazard, Traore, Sippel, Hofmann, Jantschke, Korb

 
Hello and welcome to today’s Champions League group-stage match between 
Manchester City and VfL Borussia Mönchengladbach. If this fixture feels like 
déjà vu, it’s either because it wasmeant to go off yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-postponed>
 before weather got in the way or because the sides met in the group stage of 
last year’s competition with City winning both matches.

Nonetheless, Pep Guardiola’s first Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> match as City’s manager 
is finally upon us and the Spaniard is not underestimating the Bundesliga side.

Gladbach are a brave team, one of the best teams in Europe right now. They 
have a lot of quality. The draw was difficult for us. They beat me many times 
[two of the last four meetings, the other two were draws] and they are 
aggressive. They make the game one-on-one in the build-up and when that happens 
it is a fight, man to man. With the ball they are so, so intelligent.

Plenty more to come with kickoff roughly a quarter hour from now.
 
Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime, here’s how Borussia 
Mönchengladbach entertained themselvesafter Tuesday night’s postponement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-postponed>
.
Borussia Mönchengladbach players lead ‘thunder clap’ in Manchester rain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/14/borussia-monchengladbach-manchester-city-champions-league-thunder-clap-video>
. 
Manchester City v Borussia Mönchengladbach tie postponed until Wednesday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-postponed>
How it went down last night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/13/manchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live>
.
 Yikes! Photograph: Laurence Griffiths/Getty Images  --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/21/The_Observer_quiz_of_the_year_2014.txt

1) Which UK politician was – surprisingly – the first this year to call for 
refugees from the Syrian conflict to be granted immediate asylum in Britain?

2) And, perhaps just as surprisingly, who were brought indoors at Chicago Zoo 
to keep them warm after bitter snow swept the eastern US seaboard?

3) The Environment Agency faced fierce and Ratty criticism during the spring 
floods for sacrificing residents’ safety and wellbeing for those of which small 
wetland dweller?

4) The official campaign for Scottish independence was found to have been 
almost entirely financed, perfectly properly, by Chris and Colin Weir. How did 
they come by all that money?

5) During a January advertising shoot, a professional tonsorial artiste 
charged $800 to basketball star Kobe Bryant for hairdressing fees. What, apart 
from basketball stars having possibly too much money, was noteworthy about this?

6) What officially went on sale in Colorado on the first day of the year?

7) Which royal, 15th in the line of succession, sold pictures of her baby, 
Mia, toHello!?

8) In March, the prison service was found to be prohibiting what from being 
sent to prisoners? Perhaps they’d been watchingThe Shawshank Redemption…

9) In which case did judge Anthony Leonard, QC have to tell the jury: “It is 
inevitable in a case dealing with this sort of graphic detail that members of 
the jury want to burst out laughing. Can I ask you to settle down, and remember 
where you are?”

10) Who is Victor Spirescu, who got a job washing cars in an Aldi near 
Biggleswade? Who is Meriam Ibrahim, of Sudan? And who is the inscrutable South 
African Thokozile Masipa?

11) Which event left the Conservative Party in third place for the first time 
ever in a national poll?

12) Its address is 30 St Mary Axe, City of London, and it was bought by Joseph 
Safra for more than £700m. What’s it better known as?

13) Why did we say bye-bye to Pom Pom this stormy year?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F15%2F1418662012956%2F063bb386-27e5-4baf-81cd-9ee9d55ea374-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Observer%20quiz%20of%20the%20year%202014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Observer%20quiz%20of%20the%20year%202014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F15%2F1418662012956%2F063bb386-27e5-4baf-81cd-9ee9d55ea374-1020x612.jpeg>
 Motormouth: why was Jeremy Clarkson in hot water this year? 
14) The BBC only warned Jeremy Clarkson, but sacked David Lowe, a Radio Devon 
presenter for 30 years. With reference to which word?

15) Whose was the most popular Instagram post of 2014? Actually, ever – with 
2.4m “likes”.

16) In Yunnan, China, fire destroyed the 300 houses of the Tibetan town of 
Dukezong in Zhongdian, the name of which had been changed to what to attract 
lotus-eating tourists?

17) The US National Security Agency was shown to be spying on users of which 
mobile app?

18) Boko Haram had another murderous year. What does its name translate as? 
And in Spain a new party, Podemos, arose: what does that translate as? And 
what, albeit briefly, did Isil stand for?

19) Teesside Crown Court heard that who, briefly famous in 2002 for his watery 
death but today very much alive, has paid only £121 of a £679,000 
proceeds-of-crime order?

20) In February David Cameron shared a presumably delicious, albeit reluctant, 
lunch of potted shrimps and trout, washed down with two halves of Hook Norton 
bitter, at the Swan public house in Swinbrook with which beleaguered, 
unfaithful European leader?

21) The sausage-munching borough of Copeland was found to be the place in 
England with the most fat people: 76% against a national average of 64. Which 
county?

22) According to a survey of 274 UK occupations by the Legatum Institute 
think-tank, members of which profession attain the most satisfaction – and 
which the least? The clue is in the phrase “drink and the devil”.

23) Penguin India bravely agreed to recall and pulp all remaining copies of a 
book by Wendy Doniger, an American academic, dealing with which subject?

24) A French court awarded €1 each to five fans who had ridiculously sued a 
doctor for the “emotional damage” they had ridiculously claimed to suffer after 
the death of which musician?

25) Which Hollywood actor and director, by performing the Heimlich manoeuvre 
(sans cigarillo), saved the life of a golf-tournament director who was choking 
on a piece of cheese?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F15%2F1418662292996%2F502d852b-d17c-42ec-a293-f6042a5c3f15-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Observer%20quiz%20of%20the%20year%202014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Observer%20quiz%20of%20the%20year%202014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F15%2F1418662292996%2F502d852b-d17c-42ec-a293-f6042a5c3f15-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Germany wins the World Cup, but who did they thrash on the way to the final? 
26) Who did Germany beat 7-1 in the World Cup?

27) Students elected Edward Snowden, leaker of American state secrets, as 
rector of the university of which city, whose art college also burned down this 
year ?

28) What won the Oscar for Best Picture, at a ceremony watched by 43m in 
America?

29) Britain, with Russia and the United States, is a signatory to the Budapest 
Memorandum of 1994. What (roughly) did it guarantee, of huge significance this 
past year?

30) In Canada, what incentive was offered to people who encouraged sexual 
intercourse between moose?

31) In April, viewers turned on subtitles in a BBC dramatisation of which 
Cornwall-set novel in order to make out the dialogue?

32) When and why did Yorkshire turn yellow?

33) The United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Bahrain banned which Hollywood film 
starring Russell Crowe, because it depicts a prophet?

34) Margaret Hodge, chair of the Commons public accounts committee, suggested 
that who might “show a bit of contrition by giving back his OBE”?

35) A hatch where babies could be abandoned at a welfare home had to be closed 
after 260 babies were left in 48 days. In which country?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F15%2F1418662480947%2F97fed4df-07f2-4e72-8831-cb8040c808b4-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Observer%20quiz%20of%20the%20year%202014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Observer%20quiz%20of%20the%20year%202014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F15%2F1418662480947%2F97fed4df-07f2-4e72-8831-cb8040c808b4-1020x612.jpeg>
 New arrivals: David and Victoria Beckham chose a funny gift for whose new baby?
36) To whose baby did David and Victoria Beckham send cashmere travel sets 
that, ironically given the father’s career, included sound-cancelling earmuffs?

37) Can you annoy the branding managers by failing to identify these three 
shops from the ollowing clues: a) Great War football; b) a toy penguin, c) 
Jools Holland?

38) Which A list-actor published what was widely described as the most 
execrable poetry this century? EntitledMy Heart is a Wiffle Ball/Freedom Pole, 
its first stanza ran: “I reared digital moonlight/You read its clock, scrawled 
neon across that black/Kismetly… ubiquitously crest fallen/Thrown down to 
strafe your foothills/… I’ll suck the bones pretty.”

39) “It is wonderful for [him] to be able to do what he does so well,” said 
Vogue’s editor. “It’s been a waste not being able to benefit from his passion…” 
Who was forgiven by the fashion industry in a return to a high-profile post 
with Maison Martin Margiela? And which particularly ugly passion, now illegal 
in France, had got him into trouble in the first place?

40) Which small man’s tall daughter was criticised for having no fewer than 
three prams for her new baby: a Stokke for £1,148, a Bugaboo for £879 and a 
Silver Cross Balmoral, customised with Swarovski crystals?

41) Who did Luis Suarez bite during the World Cup? The defender’s nationality 
will suffice.

42) What was Britain’s entry to Eurovision, and who sang it?

43) What’s going to be different about the new Ghostbusters?

44) A committee in which country called a neighbouring president “a wicked 
sycophant and traitor, a dirty comfort-woman for the US and despicable 
prostitute selling off the nation”? For an imaginary bonus point, what was the 
name of the committee?

45) Which adopted Scot caused the biggest #indyref twitterstorm through a 
donation to Better Together? And whose emotions got the better of him when he 
tweeted for a Yes vote: “lets do this!”?

46) Who asked whom, on Newsnight, whether he had called Angela Merkel “an 
unfuckable lard-arse”? Clue: few surprises here.

47) “Darling, do you know what? Don’t go to university. Start work straight 
after school, stay at home, save up your deposit — I’ll help you, let’s get you 
into a flat. And then we can find you a nice boyfriend and you can have a baby 
by the time you’re 27.” Whose homemade neofeminist words to her putative 
daughter, in an interview with theTelegraph?

48) Ofsted inspected 21 schools in Birmingham against the background of 
allegations of attempts of a Muslim takeover, in Operation Trojan Horse. In 
one, music had been removed from the curriculum. How many, in total, were faith 
schools?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F15%2F1418662633912%2F6d2ef773-09e7-42e7-abe3-93c80a02378c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Observer%20quiz%20of%20the%20year%202014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Observer%20quiz%20of%20the%20year%202014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F15%2F1418662633912%2F6d2ef773-09e7-42e7-abe3-93c80a02378c-1020x612.jpeg>
 Don’t panic: who is starring in the remake of Dad’s Army? BBC 
49) It was announced that a new film of Dad’s Army is to be made. Starring who 
as, respectively, Captain Mainwaring and Sergeant Wilson? Give yourself a point 
for either actor.

50) What will be Britain’s newest garden city? Its target of 30,000 homes is 
set to double its size.

51) Just days after cricketer Phillip Hughes died after being hit by a ball, a 
similar if relatively unremarked fate befell a man in white at a match in the 
Israeli city of Ashdod. What position did he hold?

52) Pre-World Cup, a cover of Private Eye featured the English football team 
arriving in Rio by plane. What eerily prescient speech-bubble was emerging from 
the pilot’s cockpit?

53) What was the flight number of the aeroplane which occupied an inordinate 
amount of search-and-rescue efforts, and inconclusive headlines, during the 
first half of the year?

54) Which “revolutionary” was awarded the Plain English Campaign’s 
“Gobbledygook Award” for 2014? Here’s a sample of his work: “This attitude of 
churlish indifference seems like nerdish deference contrasted with the 
belligerent antipathy of the indigenous farm folk, who regard the hippie-dippie 
interlopers, the denizens of the shimmering tit temples, as one fey step away 
from transvestites.’’

55) Which French clothing law was upheld by the European Court of Human Rights?

56) Adam Mugliston travelled the 1,167 miles from Land’s End to John O’Groats 
in four days, 10 hours and 44 minutes, beating the record of five days, seven 
hours and 25 minutes. On which form of transport?

57) Zach Brown from Ohio used crowdfunding to make a bowl of potato salad; 
within five days he had raised $40,000. How much had he originally sought?

58) A man from Turvey, Bedfordshire, withdrew his daughter from school because 
it would not let her wear which health prophylactic?

59 Which Nobel Prize-winning South African novelist died, aged 90?

60) In Britain, which two UK party leaders resigned?

61) Why did the figure 888,246 first become artistically significant in August?

62) A radiator salesman mistakenly received hundreds of abusive tweets 
intended for the TV commentator deemed to have made a dismal job of describing 
England’s opener in the World Cup. What name did they share?

63) Why did the deputy president of the Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party complain 
about the Scottie dogs that preceded each team at the opening of the 
Commonwealth Games?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F15%2F1418662864764%2F0a496475-a046-4535-95f6-7ede493554e7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Observer%20quiz%20of%20the%20year%202014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Observer%20quiz%20of%20the%20year%202014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fobserver-quiz-of-the-year-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F15%2F1418662864764%2F0a496475-a046-4535-95f6-7ede493554e7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Nicholas Winton with one of the children he rescued. Photograph: PA Archive 
64) Sir Nicholas Winton travelled to Prague to be honoured for his role in 
saving 669 children, mostly Jews, from the Nazis. How old is he?

65) Who played the saxophone solo on Gerry Rafferty’s “Baker Street” and died, 
aged 60?

66) Why did lead Rosetta scientist Matt Taylor’s exuberant joy, on a 
successful comet landing, turn within a day to tears of shame?

67) The tomb of which prophet was said to have been deliberately destroyed by 
Islamic State?

68) Lord Bannside died, aged 88. By what name had he been far better known?

69) Pakistan’s Saeed Ajmal was suspended by the International Cricket Council 
for bowling with his arm bent by more than how many degrees, the legal maximum?

70) There were official complaints about the amount of human excrement being 
deposited annually on top of Britain’s second highest mountain. What’s it 
called (the mountain, not the excrement)?

71) Which faith, 25,000 of whose adherents fled into the mountains to escape 
Isis, believes the world is in the care of Malak Taus, the Peacock Angel?

72) What was the name of the second US journalist shown being beheaded by 
Islamic State?

73) Which high-street chain went into administration, putting in doubt 5,596 
jobs at 720 outlets?

74) Which word did Ed Miliband use no fewer than 51 times, in a speech during 
which he accidentally forgot the deficit?

75) A hotel in Mogadishu in Somalia installed its entire country’s first-ever 
what?

Answers

1) Nigel Farage
2) The polar bears
3) Water voles
4) A lottery win of £161m
5) Kobe Bryant is bald. There’s more hair on a basketball
6) Marijuana
7) Zara Tindall
8) Books
9) The indecent-assault trial of Max Clifford. Jurors had been told that his 
genitals resembled a ‘button mushroom’
10) The first Romanian to arrive at Luton airport looking for work after a 
lifting of EU restrictions; the woman sentenced to death (and, thankfully, 
spared) for apostasy; the judge in the Oscar Pistorius trial
11) The spring Euro-elections
12) The Gherkin
13) It was a famous Dorset rock stack, washed away in the January storms
14) ‘Nigger’ – Clarkson said it in an eeny-meeny rhyme, not even broadcast; 
Lowe was unaware of its existence when he broadcast a 1932 version of ‘The Sun 
Has Got His Hat On’. He was paid £95 a week, and thought it would be a ‘nice, 
safe choice’
15) Kim Kardashian. It was a photograph of her wedding
16) Shangri-La
17) Angry Birds
18) Western Education is Forbidden; We Can; Islamic State of Iraq and Levant
19) John ‘Canoe’ Darwin
20) François Hollande
21) Cumberland
22) Clergymen (most); publicans (least)
23) The Hindus: An Alternative History
24) Michael Jackson
25) Clint Eastwood
26) Brazil
27) Glasgow
28) 12 Years a Slave
29) To ‘respect the independence and existing borders of Ukraine’
30) Tax breaks
31) Jamaica Inn
32) In July, for the Tour de France
33) Noah
34) Gary Barlow
35) China
36) Simon Cowell’s first progeny, Eric
37) Sainsbury’s; John Lewis; Aldi
38) Kristen Stewart
39) John Galliano; antisemitism
40) Bernie Ecclestone’s daughter Tamara
41) Italy defender Giorgio Chiellini
42) Children of the Universe sung by Molly Smitten-Downes
43) All-female cast
44) North Korea’s Committee for Peaceful Reunification of Korea speaking of 
South Korea’s Park Geun-Hye
45) JK Rowling; Andy Murray
46) Jeremy Paxman; Silvio Berlusconi
47) Kirstie Allsopp
48) None
49) Toby Jones and Bill Nighy
50) Bicester
51) Umpire
52) ‘Shall I keep the engines running?’
53) MH370
54) Russell Brand
55) The niqab ban
56) Bus
57) $10
58) An Ebola mask
59) Nadine Gordimer
60) Alex Salmond (SNP); and Nick Griffin (BNP)
61) The number of poppies around the Tower of London, to represent the British 
and Commonwealth servicemen killed in the Great War
62) Phil Neville
63) It was ‘disrespectful’ to Muslims, some of who view dogs as ‘unclean’. In 
some areas there has been a call for a jihad on dogs
64) 105
65) Raphael Ravenscroft
66) The shirt he was wearing was condemned as sexist. It featured women and 
guns
67) Jonah
68) Dr Ian Paisley
69) 15 degrees
70) Ben Macdui
71) Yazidi
72) Steven Sotloff
73) Phones4U
74) Together
75) Cash dispenser
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/22/UK_gamers__more_women_play_games_than_men__report_finds.txt

A new study into British gaming habits has confirmed what many industry 
watchers have been observing for years: the stereotype of the teenage boy 
playing alone in his bedroom is well and truly dead.


Based on interviews with 4,000 UK residents, the research asserts that women 
now account for 52% of the gaming audience, up from 49% three years ago. The 
study, which was commissioned by the Internet Advertising Bureau, also revealed 
there are now more people over 44 years old playing games (27% of the audience) 
than children or teenagers (22%). The gamer audience reportedly stands at 33.5 
million Britons – 69% of the population.
 Distribution of gamers among age groups – 99% of 8-17-year-olds have played 
games in the last six month. Source: IAB UK Photograph: IAB 
The surge in gaming among new areas of the population is closely related to 
the rise of the smartphone, which has made games available to a much wider 
audience than dedicated consoles or PCs.Mobile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mobile> puzzlers like Candy Crush Saga 
and Angry Birds are free, intuitive and accessible, requiring neither the 
learning time, nor the expense, of traditional “core” games experiences. The 
report claims that 56% of female interviewees over 44 have played mobile puzzle 
games, which emerged as the most popular gaming genre over all, ahead of 
traditional action adventures and shooters.

Furthermore, 54% of survey respondents cited their phone as their favourite 
gaming platform – 25% of whom admitted to playing games on it every day.
Smartphones <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/smartphones> were followed 
by computers (51%), consoles (45%) and tablets (44%).

 “The internet and mobile devices have changed the gaming landscape forever,” 
said Steve Chester, Director of Data and Industry Programmes at the Internet 
Advertising Bureau. “They’ve brought down the barriers to entry, making gaming 
far more accessible and opened it up to a whole new audience. In the past you 
needed to go out and buy an expensive console and the discs on top to get a 
decent experience, now you can just download a free app.”
 Top video game genres among players in Britain Source: IAB UK Photograph: IAB 
UK 
However the stereotype that female gamers are interested almost exclusively in 
casual smartphone titles is tested by the data. 47% of female gamers polled had 
played a disc-based game in the last six months, and 68% had played an online 
game. 56% of female gamers have played on a console.

 In terms of gaming time, 8-15-year-olds play for longest, racking up 20 hours 
of gaming a week. However, the average Briton spends six hours per week playing 
games, which, according to the report, is “just over 11% of their 52 hours of 
media consumption a week – the same share accounted for by social media and 
slightly less than listening to music (14%)“. The hours between six and eight 
in the evening are the most popular for gaming.

Although most people are playing on smartphones, gamers are apparently still 
playing for longer on traditional platforms. According to the study, the 
average gamer uses three different devices, and looking at share of gaming 
time, consoles account for 30%, followed by computers (24%), smartphones (21%) 
and tablets (18%). The most time consuming types of game are online-focused 
titles like World of Warcraft and Call of Duty – these take up 47% of gaming 
time, compared to smartphone apps (23%) and disc-based games (22%).

Despite a general move in the industry toward digitally distributed games – 
usually via smartphone,PC <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc> or 
console app stores – disc-based games are still selling. 29% of adults brought 
a new game disc in the last six months and 21% had bought a second-hand game.

The survey, entitled “Gaming Revolution” and carried out by independent 
research agency Populus, also looked into in-game advertising. Always a tricky 
proposition in console games, where onscreen ads are often seen as invasive, 
the new era of free-to-play games has changed attitudes. 61% of respondents 
said they are happy to see ads in games if it makes them free; they accepted 
1.7 ads every 30 minutes in a free game – twice as high as in paid games.

While “hardcore” gaming is clearly still rooted in its traditional user base 
(playing games is considered the most entertaining media amongst males aged 
16-24), what the study shows is a widening audience who are exploring games 
through new platforms, thanks to the proliferation of new platforms. The 
suggestion that a quarter of all gamers are now over 45-years-old may well have 
interesting ramifications for game design going forward.


 But according to the IAB, one of the most interesting discoveries through the 
4,000 surveys and 20 in-depth interviews that contributed to the findings, was 
the immersive nature of the medium. Researchers found that, when UK gamers are 
playing, they give their full attention.


“We were really surprised by how captivated consumers are by the gaming 
environment; once they are playing, they are completely ‘in the zone,’” said 
Chester. “We hear a lot about how everyone is always multi-tasking but the 
study shows that games are a unique and engaging environment which requires 
people’s complete and utter focus.”

 * Is Angry Birds Stella sexist? ‘We want to challenge stereotypes,’ says Rovio
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/04/angry-birds-stella-game-boys-girls-sexist>
 * Google survey finds games trump all other uses for tablets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2011/apr/08/tablets-mainly-for-games-survey> --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/23/Adblocking_is_helping_the_digital_sharks_eat_the_minnows___what_s_the__solution_.txt

I started using an adblocker almost before they existed because I dislike 
distractions when I am reading. The early Norwegian web browser Opera did 
almost everything better and faster than its more famous rivals: it was the 
first to have tabbed browsing, which was why I switched to it. Then I 
discovered what it called “element hiding”, which meant you could nuke 
particular areas of a web page. In particular, I could kill advertisements that 
had animated gifs.

Fears of adblocking ‘epidemic’ as report forecasts almost 15m UK users next 
year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/20/adblocking-uk-web-users> 
Nothing would any longer squirm in one corner of my eye while I was trying to 
read text. I could read faster and with more concentration. You didn’t need to 
think about making the choice. As soon as it was possible, it was obvious.

But now what had been a secret known only to nerds has moved into the 
mainstream. Adblocking is available for every browser, and the take-up is 
explosive, especially among young people. Themost recent report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/20/adblocking-uk-web-users> 
predicts that 30% of British internet users will have taken it up by the end of 
the year, but among younger and savvier users the figure is already much 
higher. An estimated 47% of 18- to 24-year-olds in the UKare already blocking 
ads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/01/more-than-nine-million-brits-now-use-adblockers>
.

The culture secretary, John Whittingdale, has described adblocking as “a 
modern-day protection racket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/02/adblocking-protection-racket-john-whittingdale>
”, and promises round-table discussions on the issue. “If people don’t pay in 
some way for content, then that content will eventually no longer exist,” he 
said. But it’s hard to see where this resounding platitude will get us. 
Adblocking software provides a service that people overwhelmingly want and for 
which they might even pay.

The desperation of the ad industry offers a tempting opportunity for profit in 
an industry not famous for its ethics

Indeed there are people making money already. It’s just that they are charging 
the advertisers not to be blocked. That is the business model of Eyeo, a German 
company that produces one of the most widely used programs. According to the 
Financial Times, Google, Amazon and Microsofthave all paid up rather than have 
their ads blocked 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/80a8ce54-a61d-11e4-9bd3-00144feab7de.html#axzz46N6i4hKN>
. This model may also have been adopted by the mobile network 3, which has 
announced plansto block adverts on its network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/19/mobile-operator-three-ad-blocking>
, except for those it chooses to let through. I would have thought this was a 
pretty dangerous precedent for a network operator to set – if it is technically 
capable of censoring adverts, then there is all sorts of other content that 
governments might want taken off the airwaves, too. Nonetheless, the 
combination of consumer demand and the increasing desperation of the ad 
industry offers a tempting opportunity for profit in an industry not famous for 
its ethics.

Adblocking, viewability and the death of mobile advertising - video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/apr/06/adblocking-app-viewability-death-mobile-advertising-publishing>
In a similar vein, the Chinese web giant Alibaba owns the most popular mobile 
browser in India, which comes with adblocking already turned on. In all these 
cases, the sharks are consuming the minnows of the business. The strong get 
stronger and the weak get weaker. The giants of the internet advertising 
business are Facebook and Google, which have about 85% of the business between 
them, and which are also the hardest to block. The weakest parties might seem 
to be the newspapers, but there is actually a tier below us, of all the smaller 
news sites run for and by enthusiasts, which are being crushed by the collapse 
in revenue.

Take graphic cards, a subject of compelling interest to gamers. One site 
specialising in them, Guru3D, gets about 4.5m hits a month, a figure that was 
about the same in 2014. Butits revenue halved between October 2014 
<http://www.guru3d.com/news-story/the-devastating-effect-of-ad-blockers-for-guru3d-com.html>
 and October 2015, in large part because its readership is drawn from the kind 
of people who knew about adblockers early. Now the problem spreads. The Toast, 
an occasionally hilarious site for sharp feminism, is alsoappealing for 
donations to make up for the damage caused by adblockers 
<http://thebread.wpengine.com/donate/>.

The most respectable answer to the problem is that advertisements need to 
become more interesting and compelling. This is extremely unlikely to happen, 
though. To make anything interesting and compelling is highly skilled labour – 
let alone something that is trying to take another person’s money.

One thing that does make ads more engaging is when the advertiser already 
knows that you want a product quite like what they’re selling. That knowledge 
is what makes Google rich. The text ads on Google can afford to look dull 
because you are actually looking for them. But if you’re not looking for 
something to buy, tracked advertising is like being followed around by a horde 
of intrusive chuggers.

In the end, there are two great pressures on the market: advertisers want to 
sell, and we don’t want to be sold to. There has to be some way to make money 
from moderating this conflict, though so far the only people to have found one 
are a few of the adblocking companies. If no one finds a better way, Mark 
Zuckerberg will end up far richer, and far more powerful, than Bill Gates ever 
was.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/23/Altered_images__photography_as_a_tool_for_gender_equality.txt

Three years ago I was travelling in Istanbul, snapping away with my Canon 
600D, when four girls came up and asked if they could take a look at my camera. 
I started teaching them how to take pictures. Even though they did not speak 
much English, we connected over photography. I realised then that taking 
pictures is a universal language that transcends cultural boundaries.

I started thinking about whether photography could transcend other types of 
boundaries that hold girls back from achieving their potential. That led to me 
and an old classmate setting upLensational <http://lensational.org>, a social 
enterprise aiming to empower women and girls in the developing world by 
equipping them with cameras and photography training.

We started teaching photography to Filipino and Indonesian domestic helpers in 
Hong Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong>. Jem, one of our 
Filipino domestic helpers, told us that learning to take photos helped her to 
overcome the loneliness of being far away from her family.

When thinking about where to go next, I looked at the World Economic Forum’s 
Global Gender Gap Report <http://www.weforum.org/issues/global-gender-gap>. 
Pakistan caught my eye. It bred heroines like Benazir Bhutto, the first woman 
elected to head a Muslim country, and Malala Yousafzai, who risked her life in 
the fight for access to education for girls. I was curious to find out if they 
have inspired their fellow Pakistani women and girls to fight for their own 
rights.

In the summer of 2013 I started an internship at Pakistan’s Citizens’ 
Commission for Human Development <http://cchd.org.pk/> (CCHD) in Lahore, which 
was organised byAiesec <http://aiesec.org/>, a global NGO that provides young 
people with cross-cultural internships. On the first day I pitched Lensational 
to my boss, Farrah Azeem Khan, an inspirational leader who worked closely with 
Benazir Bhutto. She liked the idea, especially how it could help women and 
girls discover their inner selves. She helped me arrange workshops and assigned 
two interns to my photography workshops to help with translation. I had brought 
12 disposable cameras with me from Hong Kong, donated by an NGO calledThe 
PhotoCrafters <http://www.thephotocrafters.org/>.

Over the next month I ran photography workshops for 60 Pakistanis, mainly 
women and girls. I tried to engage men and boys in my photography workshops 
too, as they have a crucial role to play in gender equality. In Hong Kong, we 
only conducted workshops for women as our aim is to empower women through 
photography. However inPakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, I 
was given the advice that in order for my programmes to be socially accepted, I 
needed to engage men and boys as well.

I adapted my workshop content to the needs of men and boys, with more 
technical details around ISO, lighting and flash. I had to overcome my own 
self-consciousness of speaking in front of 30 18-year-old male students and 
realised that the art form is a neutral entry point to engage men and boys. The 
desire to capture memories, thoughts and emotions through photography is 
universal, regardless of income and gender.

Our photography workshops focus not only on the technicalities of operating 
cameras, but also on how the participants can express their thoughts and 
feelings through the press of the shutter. I encouraged them to share their 
aspirations for the future with each other. We ran workshops with students and 
teachers at non-formal schools, children in the slums and the children of sex 
workers in Lahore’s red light district.

Following a successful crowdfunding campaign 
<https://www.helpingb.co.uk/projects/lensational-empowering-women-through-photography/>
, we will return to Pakistan in April 2015 to equip the previous participants 
with their own cameras. The workshops provide them with the medium to express 
themselves despite illiteracy. With their own cameras they also have the 
possibility of earning extra income through selling photographs. Part of the 
Lensastional model is to sell pictures taken through the workshops. In 2015, I 
hope that Lensational will help workshop participants earn extra income either 
through selling pictures in the developed world, or finding freelance 
photography opportunities locally.

Photography <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography> is a 
powerful agent of social change. During one of our workshops in Pakistan, we 
were taking pictures near a motorbike. Some boys rushed to pose on it, but not 
one girl moved forward. One of the girls eventually raised her hand with 
courage. She jumped on the motorbike, probably the first time in her life. This 
is a country where women and girls are not seen driving motorbikes. Her eyes 
were sparkling. I named this photograph ‘Courage to Drive’. The press of 
shutter created an image to challenge the definition of women and girls in this 
society. Men and boys may show skepticism in the beginning, as the faces in 
this photograph suggest, but as they see new images of girls and women they may 
change their minds. We hope that other girls we engage through Lensational can 
be as brave as this girl.

Bonnie Chiu is the co-founder of Lensational <http://lensational.org/>. Follow 
@LensationalOrg <https://twitter.com/LensationalOrg> on Twitter. 


Read more stories like this: 

• #HeForShe: how to engage men in the fight for gender equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/29/engaging-boys-men-gender-equality>


• From barrier to enabler: how politics can help girls live up to their 
potential 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/oct/22/politics-adolescent-girls-empowerment>


• I’m a man running a girls’ rights campaign. So what? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/nov/18/im-a-man-running-a-girls-rights-campaign-so-what>


• Advertising feature: When is violence against girls going to stop? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/partner-zone-girl-effect/2014/dec/11/when-is-violence-against-girls-going-to-stop>


Join the community of global development professionals and experts. Become a 
GDPN member <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/23/Barbies__chocolate__scotch__give_your_godchildren_what_they_don_t_get_at_home.txt

It’s a great, although slightly strange, honour to be asked to be a godparent. 
What’s it all about? What does it mean? What should you do? I was recently 
asked to be godmother for what will be my fourth godchild. But even with four, 
I am still unsure about the role modern godparents play.

Am I to take them to church and provide spiritual guidance? Do I bring them up 
if their parents are killed in a plane crash? Do I send them a card and lavish 
presents for their birthdays?

Related: Brigid Delaney's diary | Defy the 'wellness' industry: here are some 
simple ways to feel better in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/defy-the-wellness-industry-heres-some-free-ways-to-feel-better-in-2017-brigid-delaney>

In the film version of About a Boy, a lazy bachelor played by Hugh Grant was 
asked to become a godparent and declined by saying, “I couldn’t possibly think 
of a worse godfather … I’ll forget her birthdays until her 18th, when I’ll take 
her out and get her drunk and … try and shag her.”

Apart from NOT doing that, are there any rules for godparenting? What is the 
test for being a good godparent?

I think you should be a ballast – give them what they are lacking at home. Say 
your godchild has fierce helicopter parents who buy them politically correct 
toys and don’t let them eat lollies – it is your duty to provide some balance, 
and chocolate.

Consider presents including Barbie dolls for children of feminists, and 
violent video games, knives that look real and complicated plastic machine guns 
for the children of pacifists.

When they’re teenagers, buy them bottles of scotch and tickets to music 
festivals, trips to a capital-city strip club and clothes they want but their 
parents think are inappropriate.

Godparents can be the bridge kids need between their childish selves and the 
adults they are becoming

If they are the child of wild, out-of-control party parents, this is when you 
should offer to accompany your godchild to weekly religious services or 
volunteer together at soup kitchens.

As long as you don’t forget their birthday and send them a card with money in 
it each year, their childhood is pretty well sorted. Older kids, however, will 
often feel safer trying on a more adult role – having a stab at being more 
sophisticated, expressing fledging opinions – with someone close to their 
parents but not their parents.

Godparents can be the bridge kids need between their childish selves and the 
adults they are becoming. Let them walk across you. Take them out to a nice 
restaurant, talk to them as though they’re adults, draw out their opinions, let 
them feel comfortable and trust you. Keep the relationship with the godchild 
open, even if the one with their parents breaks down.

There are plenty of examples of that. Does Tony Blair’s birthday card with a 
tenner in it get returned to sender, after he posts it to godchild Grace Deng, 
for example? After all,Rupert Murdoch was apparently hurt by the closeness  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/13/rupert-murdoch-hurt-by-closeness-of-wendi-deng-and-tony-blair-editor-reveals>
of his ex-wife Wendi Deng to Blair, according to Chris Mitchell, the former 
editor-in-chief of the Murdoch-owned broadsheet, the Australian. And what of 
Mitchell, who said of Kevin Rudd:

I think my worst mistake was to persuade Rupert Murdoch – and it really was me 
persuading him – that we should back Kevin Rudd in 2007. I should have known 
that Kevin could not change his spots.

I think I alienated a lot of my readers with that decision and pretty quickly 
Kevin showed that he was just as difficult as he had ­always been.

Fair enough, Mitchell doesn’t like Rudd. Yet Rudd is the godfather of 
Mitchell’s son, Riley. Awk!

But just because your relationship with the parents may break down it doesn’t 
mean the relationship with the child should crumble. Leave the door open for 
future contact and you may end up having a great relationship with your 
godchild without their parents’ involvement. Although it will probably 
infuriate the parents.

It’s also an idea to clarify your role. If the parents die, would they expect 
you to adopt their children? Are you expected to provide religious guidance? 
Babysitting? Friendship? Does the relationship have an expiry date, for example 
when the child turns 18? Is the godparent primarily there for emotional support 
or for practical assistance?

Related: Am I a bad mother? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Rowan Davies
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/am-i-a-bad-mother-you-asked-google-heres-the-answer>

Friends of my parents who assumed godparent-like roles in my life when I was 
becoming an adult helped me in some of the following ways:

 *  Gave me a bed in their house for two weeks when I was at college and 
hating it. 
 * Nursed me and drove me to doctors’ appointments when, during a university 
booze cruise, someone put out their smouldering cigarette butt in my eye which 
blinded me for several weeks, and I had to wear a patch. 
 * Visited me when I was living overseas and took me to great restaurants I 
couldn’t then afford. 
 * Debated politics with me in a way that sharpened my opinions. 
 * Went to every book launch or event I have held, buying multiple copies of 
whatever I was selling. 
 * Helped me move house. 
 * Helped me clean houses to get the bond back. 
 This week I attended the funeral of one of these spectacular godparent-like 
figures who had been in my life since I was a child. A close friend of my 
parents, Tom enriched my life in so many ways – including doing many of things 
for me that I’ve listed above. I consider myself supremely lucky to have known 
him. And maybe that is the test of a good godparent. After all, you’ve got to 
pass it on.

A spur-of-the-moment sticking point

There’s a lot about the Sussan Ley travel expenses story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-secured-property-finance-months-before-apartment-purchase>
 that stinks, but what sticks in my craw is her statement that the $795,000 
purchase of the Gold Coast apartment was a spontaneous decision. Like buying a 
dress! Or a bag of chips!

Related: Sussan Ley may lose her job over expenses. She should lose it over 
health policy | Michael Buckley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/sussan-ley-may-lose-her-job-over-expenses-she-should-lose-it-over-health-policy>

 The cost of housing – particularly in Melbourne and Sydney – has meant that 
many people on average wages will either have to move away or rent forever. 
They salt away what they can for a deposit, they despair of ever being able to 
afford anything close to their workplace or family, they spend every Saturday 
for years attending auctions where property regularly sells for $100,000 more 
than they can afford. A lack of spontaneity – and lack of opportunity – 
characterise many people’s experience of the housing market.

So when a politician describes buying her second property as a spontaneous 
decision (her partner also owns a couple of investment properties, as well as a 
bin-cleaning franchise) it betrays one of the worst things a politician can be: 
out of touch.

That alone should cause Malcolm Turnbull to shiver – and make her position on 
the frontbench untenable.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/23/Carney_tells_MPs_Brexit_no_longer_biggest_risk_to_stability__WEF_warns_on__inequality___as_it_happened.txt

6.07pm GMT 18:07  <> 

And finally, the chair of the Treasury select committee Andrew Tyrie has 
commented on the session with Bank of England governor Mark Carney. He said:

The Governor has given strong advice today, both to the UK Government and to 
the governments of the rest of the EU. He’s told the Government that it is 
“highly advisable” to seek agreement to transitional arrangements, and at the 
start of the negotiations.

And he’s also told the UK’s negotiating counterparts in the EU that they, more 
than the UK, are vulnerable to financial stability risks during the period of 
transition. I hope they are all listening.

On that note, it’s time to close for the evening. Thanks for all your comments 
and we’ll be back tomorrow.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f%23block-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f%23block-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f%23block-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f%23block-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f%23block-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f%23block-58767398e4b0f10ba20b718f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
6.04pm GMT 18:04  <> 

European markets end higher

In Europe the mood was also fairly buoyant while in the US, the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average ricocheted between positive and negative and positive again 
as president elect Donald Trump gave his press conference. The final scores in 
Europe showed:

 * Germany’s Dax rose 0.54% to 11,646.17 
 * France’s Cac climbed 0.01% to 4888.71 
 * Italy’s FTSE MIB added 0.32% to 19,486.88 
 * But Spain’s Ibex ended down 0.46% at 9408.6 
Meanwhile the Dow Jones Industrial Average is currently up 19 points at 19,874 
having been as high as 19,973 and as low as 19,833 during the day so far.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c%23block-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c%23block-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c%23block-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c%23block-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c%23block-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c%23block-58766d1fe4b0f10ba20b716c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.36pm GMT 17:36  <> 

FTSE 100 hits three records

While Carney was speaking, the FTSE 100 ran up three new records, as 
continuing weakness in the pound - it hit a near 32 year low against the dollar 
excluding last year’s flash crash- continued to drive overseas earners higher.

The index smashed through the 7300 level although it later slipped back as the 
pound came off its worst levels, ending up 15.02 at 7290.49.

That marked a new peak, the tenth day of record closes and the 12th day of 
rises. All three never seen before. Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at Hargreaves 
Lansdown, said:

The Footsie has now seen a dozen days of price increases, in what amounts to 
its longest winning streak ever. It won’t go on forever, but the winter rally 
has shown it has considerable legs.

It’s not just the miners and international companies benefiting from lower 
sterling which are sustaining the rally, some domestically-focussed stocks are 
also chipping in, which suggests some optimism towards the prospects for UK 
companies is driving the market upward too.

Updated at 6.18pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd%23block-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd%23block-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd%23block-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd%23block-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd%23block-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd%23block-58766bf6e4b0c0afac91fbcd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.21pm GMT 17:21  <> 

Mark Carney at the Treasury select committee

In a two and a half hour session, Bank of England chair Mark Carney and 
members of its financial policy committee were quizzed on Brexit, forecasting 
and stress tests.

Carney said Brexit was no longer the most significant domestic risk to 
financial stablity. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587640e2e4b0710de27b870d#block-587640e2e4b0710de27b870d>
 But he maintained thatthe Bank’s actions had mitigated the risks around the 
referendum vote. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58763e63e4b0f10ba20b7069#block-58763e63e4b0f10ba20b7069>

On the Brexit discussions, Carney said the consequences of not having a 
transitional deal would be higher for the EU than for the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587641cae4b0710de27b8711#block-587641cae4b0710de27b8711>
.

On the subject of the Bank getting its forecasts wrong ahead of the vote, FPC 
member Martin Taylor said thatjust because there had not been a problem yet, 
that meant there would not be problems. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587646dfe4b0f10ba20b7080#block-587646dfe4b0f10ba20b7080>

Carney says forecasting has improved because they look at what could go wrong 
rather than thinking everything was going right. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587648e2e4b0710de27b872d#block-587648e2e4b0710de27b872d>
 He repeats thatthe Bank’s actions and preparations helped mitigate some of the 
risks following the vote. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-5876499ee4b0c0afac91fad9#block-5876499ee4b0c0afac91fad9>

Martin Taylor said he was surprised at the strength of the economy since the 
Brexit vote, but it was becauseforecasters overestimated the negative effect of 
the referendum on consumer confidence. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58764af4e4b0710de27b8737#block-58764af4e4b0710de27b8737>

Speaking of forecasts, Carney suggested the Bank was likely to lift its UK 
growth forecasts in February. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58764a62e4b0710de27b8731#block-58764a62e4b0710de27b8731>

Anil Kashyap of the FPC reckons the risk to financial stability has not yet 
increased because of the election of Donald Trump, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9#block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9>
 but the Bank admitted it was monitoring the president elect’s Twitter account 
given his potential for market moving comments.

The Bank members also spent some time defending the latest bank stress tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760#block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760>
, notably to suggestions they were not rigorous enough.

And there were also concerns about the high levels of consumer credit. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41#block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df%23block-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df%23block-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df%23block-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df%23block-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df%23block-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df%23block-5876629ee4b0710de27b87df&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.51pm GMT 16:51  <> 

And after some discussion about the buy to let market, the session ends. Chair 
Andrew Tyrie says that “ as usual when we start talking about financial 
stability we end with the housing market”, and thanks them for coming.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d%23block-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d%23block-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d%23block-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d%23block-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d%23block-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d%23block-58765fe7e4b0c0afac91fb6d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.38pm GMT 16:38  <> 

Is housing market sustainable, with prices relative to income back to levels 
seen in 2008?

Alex Brazier: That rise in level in house prices relative to income has not, 
as it did in 2008, meant a rise in household debt. It’s not house prices per 
se, it’s the level of household debt, and [that] shows a completely different 
picture.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a%23block-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a%23block-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a%23block-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a%23block-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a%23block-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a%23block-58765e21e4b0f10ba20b710a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.22pm GMT 16:22  <> 

Question on the 10.8% growth in consumer credit last year. Is the Bank too 
relaxed or complacent about this?

FPC executive director Alex Brazier says he’s not relaxed: Consumer credit 
growth is difficult to ignore. What are the risks to financial stability? We 
have been discussing the loosening of credit conditions, such as a doubling of 
interest rate free periods for credit cards. We need to be alert and vigilant.

It has been a driver of consumer spending, so it’s important how we should 
address it, as it has a broader economic resilience.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41%23block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41%23block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41%23block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41%23block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41%23block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41%23block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.03pm GMT 16:03  <> 

Carney and his committee defend the results of the tests, but says he welcomes 
analysis and discussion ( such as by the head of an independent review of banks 
Sir John Vickers, who said the stress tests were not rigorous enough.)

An ITV report 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2017-01-10/sir-john-vickers-bank-of-england-stress-tests-not-tough-enough/>
 said using more rigorous tests would have meant only Lloyds passed, but Carney 
and co said they could not see how this result was achieved and seemed 
satisfied with the outcome of their own tests.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15%23block-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15%23block-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15%23block-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15%23block-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15%23block-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15%23block-5876563ee4b0c0afac91fb15&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.50pm GMT 15:50  <> 

Anil Kashyap says he expects it will become exceptional for UK banks to fail 
the stress test in future.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad%23block-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad%23block-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad%23block-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad%23block-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad%23block-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad%23block-58765432e4b0f10ba20b70ad&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.49pm GMT 15:49  <> 

Question on bank stress tests, when RBS failed in November: Should we expect 
every year to see at least one bank fail so we can’t say they are not difficult 
enough.

Martin Taylor: People say that anyway. We don’t consider that. We try to set 
stress which is severe and plausible and put the system through the wringer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876534de4b0710de27b8760%23block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876534de4b0710de27b8760%23block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876534de4b0710de27b8760%23block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876534de4b0710de27b8760%23block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876534de4b0710de27b8760%23block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5876534de4b0710de27b8760%23block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.43pm GMT 15:43  <> 

Pound hits new 31 year low against the dollar

Meanwhile the pound has hit a new 31 year low against the dollar - excluding 
the flash crash - with the US currency boosted ahead of Donald Trump’s press 
conference on hopes of details of his plans for the country’s economy.Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sterling> has fallen as low as $1.2039 
and is now down 1% at $1.2056. Neil Wilson, senior market analyst at ETX 
Capital, said:

The move looks dollar driven with the buck heavy bid at day highs across the 
board ahead of Donald Trump’s news conference.

It’s now looking very precarious indeed for sterling and we could see it drop 
further as stops are triggered. Cable is down another 1% today and is flirting 
with flash crash lows and could spark more selling.

The correlation between the pound and the FTSE is obvious. The sharp move 
south at 15:18 saw sterling dip half a cent against the dollar in just a minute 
and we witnessed a corresponding move in the FTSE 100 at the exact same time, 
with the index jumping 10 points in 60 seconds. At pixel time it was rocking 
new highs at 7,321, on course for yet another record close.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8%23block-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8%23block-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8%23block-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8%23block-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8%23block-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8%23block-58765210e4b0c0afac91faf8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.28pm GMT 15:28  <> 

We monitor Trump's Twitter account

Question: Do you monitor Trump’s Twitter account in case he says something,.

Carney: Yes. We monitor your Twitter account, chairman. So yes we follow it.

We look forward to working with the new US members.

Updated at 3.28pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751%23block-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751%23block-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751%23block-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751%23block-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751%23block-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751%23block-58764ec1e4b0710de27b8751&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.26pm GMT 15:26  <> 

Risks have stayed the same so far after Trump - Bank

Tyrie: is Trump a risk to financial stability?

Anil Kashyap: The committee hasn’t discussed this but personally, the first 
thing will be Trump filling the vice chair position at Federal Reserve. That 
could change the way the Fed negotiates over financial stability issues.

It still takes 60 votes in Senate to do many things, anything attached to tax 
and spending review you need 50. Anything to do with rolling back Dodd Franks, 
they can’t do that will just 50 votes.

He can do personal changes immediately.

Tyrie: so has risk up or stayed the same?

The same, the number of things the US can do unilaterally that he can trigger 
is limited in the short term.

Updated at 3.29pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9%23block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9%23block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9%23block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9%23block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20tells%20MPs%20Brexit%20no%20longer%20biggest%20risk%20to%20stability%3B%20WEF%20warns%20on%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9%23block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9%23block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
And finally, the chair of the Treasury select committee Andrew Tyrie has 
commented on the session with Bank of England governor Mark Carney. He said:

The Governor has given strong advice today, both to the UK Government and to 
the governments of the rest of the EU. He’s told the Government that it is 
“highly advisable” to seek agreement to transitional arrangements, and at the 
start of the negotiations.

And he’s also told the UK’s negotiating counterparts in the EU that they, more 
than the UK, are vulnerable to financial stability risks during the period of 
transition. I hope they are all listening.

On that note, it’s time to close for the evening. Thanks for all your comments 
and we’ll be back tomorrow.
 
In Europe the mood was also fairly buoyant while in the US, the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average ricocheted between positive and negative and positive again 
as president elect Donald Trump gave his press conference. The final scores in 
Europe showed:

 * Germany’s Dax rose 0.54% to 11,646.17 
 * France’s Cac climbed 0.01% to 4888.71 
 * Italy’s FTSE MIB added 0.32% to 19,486.88 
 * But Spain’s Ibex ended down 0.46% at 9408.6 
Meanwhile the Dow Jones Industrial Average is currently up 19 points at 19,874 
having been as high as 19,973 and as low as 19,833 during the day so far.
 
While Carney was speaking, the FTSE 100 ran up three new records, as 
continuing weakness in the pound - it hit a near 32 year low against the dollar 
excluding last year’s flash crash- continued to drive overseas earners higher.

The index smashed through the 7300 level although it later slipped back as the 
pound came off its worst levels, ending up 15.02 at 7290.49.

That marked a new peak, the tenth day of record closes and the 12th day of 
rises. All three never seen before. Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at Hargreaves 
Lansdown, said:

The Footsie has now seen a dozen days of price increases, in what amounts to 
its longest winning streak ever. It won’t go on forever, but the winter rally 
has shown it has considerable legs.

It’s not just the miners and international companies benefiting from lower 
sterling which are sustaining the rally, some domestically-focussed stocks are 
also chipping in, which suggests some optimism towards the prospects for UK 
companies is driving the market upward too.
 
In a two and a half hour session, Bank of England chair Mark Carney and 
members of its financial policy committee were quizzed on Brexit, forecasting 
and stress tests.

Carney said Brexit was no longer the most significant domestic risk to 
financial stablity. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587640e2e4b0710de27b870d#block-587640e2e4b0710de27b870d>
 But he maintained thatthe Bank’s actions had mitigated the risks around the 
referendum vote. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58763e63e4b0f10ba20b7069#block-58763e63e4b0f10ba20b7069>

On the Brexit discussions, Carney said the consequences of not having a 
transitional deal would be higher for the EU than for the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587641cae4b0710de27b8711#block-587641cae4b0710de27b8711>
.

On the subject of the Bank getting its forecasts wrong ahead of the vote, FPC 
member Martin Taylor said thatjust because there had not been a problem yet, 
that meant there would not be problems. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587646dfe4b0f10ba20b7080#block-587646dfe4b0f10ba20b7080>

Carney says forecasting has improved because they look at what could go wrong 
rather than thinking everything was going right. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-587648e2e4b0710de27b872d#block-587648e2e4b0710de27b872d>
 He repeats thatthe Bank’s actions and preparations helped mitigate some of the 
risks following the vote. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-5876499ee4b0c0afac91fad9#block-5876499ee4b0c0afac91fad9>

Martin Taylor said he was surprised at the strength of the economy since the 
Brexit vote, but it was becauseforecasters overestimated the negative effect of 
the referendum on consumer confidence. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58764af4e4b0710de27b8737#block-58764af4e4b0710de27b8737>

Speaking of forecasts, Carney suggested the Bank was likely to lift its UK 
growth forecasts in February. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58764a62e4b0710de27b8731#block-58764a62e4b0710de27b8731>

Anil Kashyap of the FPC reckons the risk to financial stability has not yet 
increased because of the election of Donald Trump, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9#block-58764df7e4b0c0afac91fae9>
 but the Bank admitted it was monitoring the president elect’s Twitter account 
given his potential for market moving comments.

The Bank members also spent some time defending the latest bank stress tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760#block-5876534de4b0710de27b8760>
, notably to suggestions they were not rigorous enough.

And there were also concerns about the high levels of consumer credit. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/11/wef-global-economic-risks-trump-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41#block-58765ac9e4b0c0afac91fb41>
 
And after some discussion about the buy to let market, the session ends. Chair 
Andrew Tyrie says that “ as usual when we start talking about financial 
stability we end with the housing market”, and thanks them for coming.
 
Is housing market sustainable, with prices relative to income back to levels 
seen in 2008?

Alex Brazier: That rise in level in house prices relative to income has not, 
as it did in 2008, meant a rise in household debt. It’s not house prices per 
se, it’s the level of household debt, and [that] shows a completely different 
picture.
 
Question on the 10.8% growth in consumer credit last year. Is the Bank too 
relaxed or complacent about this?

FPC executive director Alex Brazier says he’s not relaxed: Consumer credit 
growth is difficult to ignore. What are the risks to financial stability? We 
have been discussing the loosening of credit conditions, such as a doubling of 
interest rate free periods for credit cards. We need to be alert and vigilant.

It has been a driver of consumer spending, so it’s important how we should 
address it, as it has a broader economic resilience.
 
Carney and his committee defend the results of the tests, but says he welcomes 
analysis and discussion ( such as by the head of an independent review of banks 
Sir John Vickers, who said the stress tests were not rigorous enough.)

An ITV report 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2017-01-10/sir-john-vickers-bank-of-england-stress-tests-not-tough-enough/>
 said using more rigorous tests would have meant only Lloyds passed, but Carney 
and co said they could not see how this result was achieved and seemed 
satisfied with the outcome of their own tests.
 
Anil Kashyap says he expects it will become exceptional for UK banks to fail 
the stress test in future.
 
Question on bank stress tests, when RBS failed in November: Should we expect 
every year to see at least one bank fail so we can’t say they are not difficult 
enough.

Martin Taylor: People say that anyway. We don’t consider that. We try to set 
stress which is severe and plausible and put the system through the wringer.
 
Meanwhile the pound has hit a new 31 year low against the dollar - excluding 
the flash crash - with the US currency boosted ahead of Donald Trump’s press 
conference on hopes of details of his plans for the country’s economy.Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sterling> has fallen as low as $1.2039 
and is now down 1% at $1.2056. Neil Wilson, senior market analyst at ETX 
Capital, said:

The move looks dollar driven with the buck heavy bid at day highs across the 
board ahead of Donald Trump’s news conference.

It’s now looking very precarious indeed for sterling and we could see it drop 
further as stops are triggered. Cable is down another 1% today and is flirting 
with flash crash lows and could spark more selling.

The correlation between the pound and the FTSE is obvious. The sharp move 
south at 15:18 saw sterling dip half a cent against the dollar in just a minute 
and we witnessed a corresponding move in the FTSE 100 at the exact same time, 
with the index jumping 10 points in 60 seconds. At pixel time it was rocking 
new highs at 7,321, on course for yet another record close.
 
Question: Do you monitor Trump’s Twitter account in case he says something,.

Carney: Yes. We monitor your Twitter account, chairman. So yes we follow it.

We look forward to working with the new US members.
 
Tyrie: is Trump a risk to financial stability?

Anil Kashyap: The committee hasn’t discussed this but personally, the first 
thing will be Trump filling the vice chair position at Federal Reserve. That 
could change the way the Fed negotiates over financial stability issues.

It still takes 60 votes in Senate to do many things, anything attached to tax 
and spending review you need 50. Anything to do with rolling back Dodd Franks, 
they can’t do that will just 50 votes.

He can do personal changes immediately.

Tyrie: so has risk up or stayed the same?

The same, the number of things the US can do unilaterally that he can trigger 
is limited in the short term.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/23/European_stock_markets_fall__but_pound_rallies__as_Trump_fears_bite___as_it__happened.txt

7.17pm GMT 19:17  <> 

Closing post: Pound profits after surprise US election

After a momentous week, Wall Street seems to have simply run out of energy.

The Dow Jones index is virtually flat now, up 0.02%, while the S&P 500 and the 
Nasdaq are slightly in the red. Traders are taking a breather, and watching 
political events unfold.

And there’s plenty happening -- the latest news is that vice-president in 
waiting Mike Pence has just been appointed to lead the Trump transition team, 
instead of Chris Christie.

Our US politics liveblog has all the details:

Mike Pence replaces Christie to lead Trump transition, reports say – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/11/donald-trump-news-us-politics-live>
So I’m going to wrap up for the week now. Here’s Katie Allen’s news story on 
today’s financial developments.

Pound posts best fortnight in eight years after Trump win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/pound-trump-euro-brexit-sterling>
Goodnight! GW
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5826167be4b0364c91945a1c%23block-5826167be4b0364c91945a1c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5826167be4b0364c91945a1c%23block-5826167be4b0364c91945a1c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5826167be4b0364c91945a1c%23block-5826167be4b0364c91945a1c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5826167be4b0364c91945a1c%23block-5826167be4b0364c91945a1c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5826167be4b0364c91945a1c%23block-5826167be4b0364c91945a1c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5826167be4b0364c91945a1c%23block-5826167be4b0364c91945a1c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.09pm GMT 19:09  <> 

JP Morgan analysts are warning tonight that Donald Trump could destabilise the 
US economy if he slaps tariffs on new imports from abroad:
James Pethokoukis (@JimPethokoukis) 
JPMorgan on Trump-onomics pic.twitter.com/Zx9VnvWNoY <https://t.co/Zx9VnvWNoY>
 <https://twitter.com/JimPethokoukis/status/797153118949703680> November 11, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/JimPethokoukis/status/797153118949703680> 
Hopefully they’ve sent a copy to their boss, CEO Jamie Dimon -- rumoured to be 
in the running to become the next Treasury secretary.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582616fae4b05c05c52f3ea5%23block-582616fae4b05c05c52f3ea5>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582616fae4b05c05c52f3ea5%23block-582616fae4b05c05c52f3ea5>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582616fae4b05c05c52f3ea5%23block-582616fae4b05c05c52f3ea5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582616fae4b05c05c52f3ea5%23block-582616fae4b05c05c52f3ea5>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582616fae4b05c05c52f3ea5%23block-582616fae4b05c05c52f3ea5>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582616fae4b05c05c52f3ea5%23block-582616fae4b05c05c52f3ea5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
6.34pm GMT 18:34  <> 

One other interesting development tonight....It’s emerged that three employees 
at major banks have recently been arrested by Britain’s National Crime Agency 
as part of a UK insider trading investigation.

The arrests are linked to the Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama-papers>, and were made in the last 
few months but only reported today.

More here:

Three bank employees arrested in UK insider trading investigation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/three-bank-employees-arrested-uk-insider-trading-panama-papers>
Updated at 6.34pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260ed5e4b0eb4ebf273051%23block-58260ed5e4b0eb4ebf273051>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260ed5e4b0eb4ebf273051%23block-58260ed5e4b0eb4ebf273051>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260ed5e4b0eb4ebf273051%23block-58260ed5e4b0eb4ebf273051&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260ed5e4b0eb4ebf273051%23block-58260ed5e4b0eb4ebf273051>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260ed5e4b0eb4ebf273051%23block-58260ed5e4b0eb4ebf273051>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260ed5e4b0eb4ebf273051%23block-58260ed5e4b0eb4ebf273051&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
6.22pm GMT 18:22  <> 

Pound has a good week against the euro

As currency traders head home, or to the nearest City winebar, they can 
reflect on the pound’s unexpected strength this week.

As this chart shows, sterling has gained more than 3% against the single 
currency this week, from €1.12 to around €1.16.
The pound vs the euro this week 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-11T18:10:42/embed.html>
There’s an argument that people are hoping that Brexit will be easier with 
Trump in the White House.

But I think the pound is really benefitting from worries about Europe. Italy’s 
constitutional referendum next month, or the French and German elections in 
2017, could all undermine the eurozone.

Conner Campbell of SpreadEx says:

Fears of the rising political right in the Eurozone and potential US 
instability once Trump takes over are crucially helping to put Brexit on the 
back-burner for the time being.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260aace4b0364c919459da%23block-58260aace4b0364c919459da>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260aace4b0364c919459da%23block-58260aace4b0364c919459da>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260aace4b0364c919459da%23block-58260aace4b0364c919459da&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260aace4b0364c919459da%23block-58260aace4b0364c919459da>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260aace4b0364c919459da%23block-58260aace4b0364c919459da>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260aace4b0364c919459da%23block-58260aace4b0364c919459da&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
6.05pm GMT 18:05  <> 
 President Barack Obama is applauded as he stands to speak during the 63rd 
National Veterans Day Observance ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery today. 
Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP 
The US government bond market is closed today for Veterans Day.

And bond traders should enjoy the rest while they can - Treasuries will surely 
be volatile next week too, as the clock ticks towards Donald Trump’s 
inauguration.

Capital Economics’ Julian Jessop predicts further losses, as the markets try 
to price in the prospect of a new infrastructure spending programme financed by 
debt.

He writes:

The election results mean that there may now be a big fiscal expansion, which 
adds to the downside risks for bonds for at least two reasons. First, it would 
increase their supply. Second, we think it would mainly boost inflation rather 
than growth.

Jessop also suspects that the Wall Street rally will fizzle out, as investors 
focus their minds on possible trade wars under President Trump.

For a start, the strong performance of some sectors (such as industrials, 
basic materials and energy) has reflected hopes for a big splurge on 
infrastructure spending, which we think is unlikely – most of the fiscal 
stimulus is likely to take the form of tax cuts.Stock markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/stock-markets> do not tend to fare well 
when inflation is rising either.

And investors may start to worry again soon about the implications for growth 
of Trump’s other proposals, such as trade tariffs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582605c1e4b0eb4ebf273020%23block-582605c1e4b0eb4ebf273020>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582605c1e4b0eb4ebf273020%23block-582605c1e4b0eb4ebf273020>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582605c1e4b0eb4ebf273020%23block-582605c1e4b0eb4ebf273020&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582605c1e4b0eb4ebf273020%23block-582605c1e4b0eb4ebf273020>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582605c1e4b0eb4ebf273020%23block-582605c1e4b0eb4ebf273020>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582605c1e4b0eb4ebf273020%23block-582605c1e4b0eb4ebf273020&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.36pm GMT 17:36  <> 

There’s no respite for the Mexican economy, I’m afraid.

Its government bonds are weakening again, driving up yields, and the peso is 
hitting fresh lows:
Joe Weisenthal (@TheStalwart) 
Look at the yield on the Mexican 5 year this week. pic.twitter.com/LTWM3aibrA 
<https://t.co/LTWM3aibrA>
 <https://twitter.com/TheStalwart/status/797128373818589184> November 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/TheStalwart/status/797128373818589184> Sara Eisen 
(@SaraEisen) 
no letup in Mexican Peso selling...it's lost 14% of its value since election 
day and continues to fallpic.twitter.com/73LhPpV0IG <https://t.co/73LhPpV0IG>
 <https://twitter.com/SaraEisen/status/797084867402092545> November 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SaraEisen/status/797084867402092545> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260098e4b0364c9194599c%23block-58260098e4b0364c9194599c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260098e4b0364c9194599c%23block-58260098e4b0364c9194599c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260098e4b0364c9194599c%23block-58260098e4b0364c9194599c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260098e4b0364c9194599c%23block-58260098e4b0364c9194599c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260098e4b0364c9194599c%23block-58260098e4b0364c9194599c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58260098e4b0364c9194599c%23block-58260098e4b0364c9194599c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.17pm GMT 17:17  <> 

European markets end week with losses

The Trump Jump we saw in the immediate aftermath of this week’s presidential 
election has hit a hump.

London’s FTSE 100 has suffered another day of chunky losses, closing down 97 
points, or almost 1.5%.

The stronger pound is partly to blame; sterling is up 0.5% right not over 
$1.26.

 Joshua Mahony, market analyst at IG, explains that Brexit anxiety has faded 
this week.

If FTSE bulls were emboldened by Wednesday’s incredible fightback to regain 
the 7000 mark, they will be feeling somewhat weary today, as the UK benchmark 
suffered substantial losses amid a comprehensive recovery for sterling.

The pound was expected to rise on last week’s realisation that Article 50 is 
now in the hands of Brexit-sceptic MPs, and with the US election now out of the 
way, we are seeing that pound rebound take shape. Much like a weakening euro 
was perceived to be good for UK stocks, today’s pound rally is doing little to 
help the FTSE, which has suffered more than most.

Most other European stock markets also closed in the red, and Wall Street is 
still down
 . Photograph: Thomson Reuters 
As flagged up earlier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/11/emerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live?page=with:block-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b#block-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b>
, analysts believe Europe will suffer if Trump does manage to boostUS growth 
through tax cuts and a spending boost.

Jasper Lawler of CMC Markets says:

The new Donald Trump vision for America is drawing the attention of 
international capital. This renewed belief in a better environment for 
corporate America is at the expense of Europe and especially emerging markets.

The City is also concerned by the heavy losses in the bond market this week 
<https://twitter.com/Schuldensuehner/status/796983323256061952/photo/1?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
, which wiped out around $1trn. That, funnily enough, is also how much has been 
added to the US equities market this week, according to Bloomberg.

Updated at 5.24pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825f9dce4b0364c9194597d%23block-5825f9dce4b0364c9194597d>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825f9dce4b0364c9194597d%23block-5825f9dce4b0364c9194597d>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825f9dce4b0364c9194597d%23block-5825f9dce4b0364c9194597d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825f9dce4b0364c9194597d%23block-5825f9dce4b0364c9194597d>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825f9dce4b0364c9194597d%23block-5825f9dce4b0364c9194597d>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825f9dce4b0364c9194597d%23block-5825f9dce4b0364c9194597d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.48pm GMT 16:48  <> 

Buffett: Wealth inequality drove some voters to Trump
 Photograph: Warren Buffett 
Billionaire investor Warren Buffett says income inequality helped to drive 
Donald Trump to the White House.

In an interview with CNN, Buffett, who has called for tax reform in the past, 
says ordinary Americans feel that wealth distribution is unfair:

The Forbes 400 [list of wealthiest Americans] had $93bn dollars in 1982, and 
they’ve got 2.4 trillion dollars today. That’s 25 times as much.

If you’ve been working 40 hours a week, maybe holding a second job and you 
work with the Little League [junior baseball] and you’ve been a good parent, 
and you’re really struggling.

Then you think, “What’s wrong with this picture?”, and you want to change the 
picture.

Buffett, worth an estimated $70bn, also criticises Trump’s criticism of free 
trade, saying protectionism would harm the US economy.

But while Buffett isn’t a fan of Trump, he’s now calling on Americans to back 
the president-elect. Unity, he says, is now crucial, after a particularly 
negative and personal campaign:

It’s every important that the American people coalesce behind a president.

That doesn’t mean they can’t criticise, or disagree with what he’s doing. But 
we need a country unified by a president.

Buffett also warns that Trump can’t deliver on all his pledges, such as 
doubling economic growth.

“Nobody can grow the economy 4% in real terms over time...The math is too 
extraordinary.”

The full interview is online here 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/11/11/investing/warren-buffett-donald-trump-stock/>.
Poppy Harlow (@PoppyHarlowCNN) 
Buffett after Trump win: '100%' optimistic about America. My full conversation 
w/@WarrenBuffett <https://twitter.com/WarrenBuffett> on the election: 
https://t.co/fIR5WOHTim <https://t.co/fIR5WOHTim>
 <https://twitter.com/PoppyHarlowCNN/status/797105933889470465> November 11, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/PoppyHarlowCNN/status/797105933889470465> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825f1eae4b05c05c52f3dc7%23block-5825f1eae4b05c05c52f3dc7>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825f1eae4b05c05c52f3dc7%23block-5825f1eae4b05c05c52f3dc7>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825f1eae4b05c05c52f3dc7%23block-5825f1eae4b05c05c52f3dc7&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825f1eae4b05c05c52f3dc7%23block-5825f1eae4b05c05c52f3dc7>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825f1eae4b05c05c52f3dc7%23block-5825f1eae4b05c05c52f3dc7>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825f1eae4b05c05c52f3dc7%23block-5825f1eae4b05c05c52f3dc7&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.20pm GMT 16:20  <> 

Speaking of Europe... Trade commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom suggested today 
that talks with the US about the controversial TTIP agreement will probably be 
‘frozen’ for a while now.

Malmstrom told reporters in Brussels that:

“There will be a natural pause, of course, while we wait for the next 
administration; then, for quite some time TTIP will probably be in the freezer.

Then what happens when it’s defrosted, I think we will need to wait and see.”
Duncan Robinson (@duncanrobinson) 
Malmstrom: "I don’t think we see the resumption of any TTIP negotiation in 
quite a long time.”
 <https://twitter.com/duncanrobinson/status/797086127865954304> November 11, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/duncanrobinson/status/797086127865954304> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825ef67e4b05c05c52f3db8%23block-5825ef67e4b05c05c52f3db8>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825ef67e4b05c05c52f3db8%23block-5825ef67e4b05c05c52f3db8>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825ef67e4b05c05c52f3db8%23block-5825ef67e4b05c05c52f3db8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825ef67e4b05c05c52f3db8%23block-5825ef67e4b05c05c52f3db8>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825ef67e4b05c05c52f3db8%23block-5825ef67e4b05c05c52f3db8>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825ef67e4b05c05c52f3db8%23block-5825ef67e4b05c05c52f3db8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.02pm GMT 16:02  <> 

This week can’t end enough for City traders, who are sending shares steadily 
lower in London.

The FTSE 100 is now down 116 points, or -1.7%, at 6712. 

Precious metals firms are leading the rout, along with oil companies and major 
exporters.
Mike van Dulken (@Accendo_Mike) 
#FTSE100 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/FTSE100?src=hash> lows of the week. Risk 
off into the weekend to complete bearish flag?
 <https://twitter.com/Accendo_Mike/status/797106287590916100> November 11, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/Accendo_Mike/status/797106287590916100> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825eb5ae4b05c05c52f3d99%23block-5825eb5ae4b05c05c52f3d99>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825eb5ae4b05c05c52f3d99%23block-5825eb5ae4b05c05c52f3d99>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825eb5ae4b05c05c52f3d99%23block-5825eb5ae4b05c05c52f3d99&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825eb5ae4b05c05c52f3d99%23block-5825eb5ae4b05c05c52f3d99>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825eb5ae4b05c05c52f3d99%23block-5825eb5ae4b05c05c52f3d99>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825eb5ae4b05c05c52f3d99%23block-5825eb5ae4b05c05c52f3d99&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.57pm GMT 15:57  <> 

Germany is defying the global market selloff today, with its DAX index 
slightly higher.

That’s partly thanks to Deutsche Bank, whose shares have surged over 4% today. 
There’s speculation that the German lender has a better chance of negotiating a 
lower penalty with the US Department of Justice, over misconduct before the 
financial crisis.

Deutsche should also benefit from a higher inflation environment; record low 
interest rates have hurt its profitability.

Its share plunged through €10 at the end of September, on fears over its 
financial health. They’re now worth €14.7
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e869e4b0364c919458fd%23block-5825e869e4b0364c919458fd>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e869e4b0364c919458fd%23block-5825e869e4b0364c919458fd>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e869e4b0364c919458fd%23block-5825e869e4b0364c919458fd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e869e4b0364c919458fd%23block-5825e869e4b0364c919458fd>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e869e4b0364c919458fd%23block-5825e869e4b0364c919458fd>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e869e4b0364c919458fd%23block-5825e869e4b0364c919458fd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.46pm GMT 15:46  <> 

Europe’s biggest threat from the Trump presidency is a new trade war that 
scuppers exports and growth, says Kallum Pickering of Germany’s Berenberg bank.

He writes:

Europe earns almost 20% of its GDP from exports, that is 50% more than the US 
[see chart below].

European producers would feel the pinch of a more inward-looking and less 
trade-oriented US. A US shift towards isolationism over the next four years 
that might then be mirrored by other countries is the major economic risk for 
Europe following the Trump victory.

If Trump does what he said in the campaign, namely brand China as a currency 
manipulator and place a 45% punitive tariff on Chinese imports, he could 
trigger a trade war. While Congress would block many of his more extreme policy 
proposals, such a move would badly exacerbate a tilt in the Western world 
against globalisation. Trade oriented economies like those of Europe would lose 
even more from that than the US.

 Photograph: Berenberg Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b%23block-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b%23block-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b%23block-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b%23block-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b%23block-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b%23block-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.28pm GMT 15:28  <> 
 The statue of George Washington at Federal Hall adjacent to the New York 
Stock Exchange. Photograph: Bryan R. Smith/AFP/Getty Images 
After several days of gains, the US stock market appears to be readjusting to 
the new reality.


Some of the shares that have done best since Donald Trump won the election are 
leading the fallers.

That includes drugs firms Pfizer (-2%) and Merck (-1%), who had posted gains 
after the prospect of a price-gouging clampdown faded with Hillary Clinton’s 
victory chances.

Exxon Mobile is down 1.8% -- it had been another Trump gainer, as the next 
president is relaxed about the dangers of climate change.

And Caterpillar had lost 0.6%; having been driven up by the prospect of new 
orders for its digging machines to help build new American highways, airports 
and schools.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e22ce4b0364c919458e0%23block-5825e22ce4b0364c919458e0>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e22ce4b0364c919458e0%23block-5825e22ce4b0364c919458e0>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e22ce4b0364c919458e0%23block-5825e22ce4b0364c919458e0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e22ce4b0364c919458e0%23block-5825e22ce4b0364c919458e0>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20stock%20markets%20fall%2C%20but%20pound%20rallies%2C%20as%20Trump%20fears%20bite%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e22ce4b0364c919458e0%23block-5825e22ce4b0364c919458e0>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Femerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5825e22ce4b0364c919458e0%23block-5825e22ce4b0364c919458e0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
After a momentous week, Wall Street seems to have simply run out of energy.

The Dow Jones index is virtually flat now, up 0.02%, while the S&P 500 and the 
Nasdaq are slightly in the red. Traders are taking a breather, and watching 
political events unfold.

And there’s plenty happening -- the latest news is that vice-president in 
waiting Mike Pence has just been appointed to lead the Trump transition team, 
instead of Chris Christie.

Our US politics liveblog has all the details:

Mike Pence replaces Christie to lead Trump transition, reports say – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/11/donald-trump-news-us-politics-live>
So I’m going to wrap up for the week now. Here’s Katie Allen’s news story on 
today’s financial developments.

Pound posts best fortnight in eight years after Trump win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/pound-trump-euro-brexit-sterling>
Goodnight! GW
 
JP Morgan analysts are warning tonight that Donald Trump could destabilise the 
US economy if he slaps tariffs on new imports from abroad:
James Pethokoukis (@JimPethokoukis) 
JPMorgan on Trump-onomics pic.twitter.com/Zx9VnvWNoY <https://t.co/Zx9VnvWNoY>
 <https://twitter.com/JimPethokoukis/status/797153118949703680> November 11, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/JimPethokoukis/status/797153118949703680> 
Hopefully they’ve sent a copy to their boss, CEO Jamie Dimon -- rumoured to be 
in the running to become the next Treasury secretary.
 
One other interesting development tonight....It’s emerged that three employees 
at major banks have recently been arrested by Britain’s National Crime Agency 
as part of a UK insider trading investigation.

The arrests are linked to the Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama-papers>, and were made in the last 
few months but only reported today.

More here:

Three bank employees arrested in UK insider trading investigation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/three-bank-employees-arrested-uk-insider-trading-panama-papers> 
As currency traders head home, or to the nearest City winebar, they can 
reflect on the pound’s unexpected strength this week.

As this chart shows, sterling has gained more than 3% against the single 
currency this week, from €1.12 to around €1.16.
The pound vs the euro this week 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-11T18:10:42/embed.html>
There’s an argument that people are hoping that Brexit will be easier with 
Trump in the White House.

But I think the pound is really benefitting from worries about Europe. Italy’s 
constitutional referendum next month, or the French and German elections in 
2017, could all undermine the eurozone.

Conner Campbell of SpreadEx says:

Fears of the rising political right in the Eurozone and potential US 
instability once Trump takes over are crucially helping to put Brexit on the 
back-burner for the time being.
  President Barack Obama is applauded as he stands to speak during the 63rd 
National Veterans Day Observance ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery today. 
Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP 
The US government bond market is closed today for Veterans Day.

And bond traders should enjoy the rest while they can - Treasuries will surely 
be volatile next week too, as the clock ticks towards Donald Trump’s 
inauguration.

Capital Economics’ Julian Jessop predicts further losses, as the markets try 
to price in the prospect of a new infrastructure spending programme financed by 
debt.

He writes:

The election results mean that there may now be a big fiscal expansion, which 
adds to the downside risks for bonds for at least two reasons. First, it would 
increase their supply. Second, we think it would mainly boost inflation rather 
than growth.

Jessop also suspects that the Wall Street rally will fizzle out, as investors 
focus their minds on possible trade wars under President Trump.

For a start, the strong performance of some sectors (such as industrials, 
basic materials and energy) has reflected hopes for a big splurge on 
infrastructure spending, which we think is unlikely – most of the fiscal 
stimulus is likely to take the form of tax cuts.Stock markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/stock-markets> do not tend to fare well 
when inflation is rising either.

And investors may start to worry again soon about the implications for growth 
of Trump’s other proposals, such as trade tariffs.
 
There’s no respite for the Mexican economy, I’m afraid.

Its government bonds are weakening again, driving up yields, and the peso is 
hitting fresh lows:
Joe Weisenthal (@TheStalwart) 
Look at the yield on the Mexican 5 year this week. pic.twitter.com/LTWM3aibrA 
<https://t.co/LTWM3aibrA>
 <https://twitter.com/TheStalwart/status/797128373818589184> November 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/TheStalwart/status/797128373818589184> Sara Eisen 
(@SaraEisen) 
no letup in Mexican Peso selling...it's lost 14% of its value since election 
day and continues to fallpic.twitter.com/73LhPpV0IG <https://t.co/73LhPpV0IG>
 <https://twitter.com/SaraEisen/status/797084867402092545> November 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SaraEisen/status/797084867402092545>  
The Trump Jump we saw in the immediate aftermath of this week’s presidential 
election has hit a hump.

London’s FTSE 100 has suffered another day of chunky losses, closing down 97 
points, or almost 1.5%.

The stronger pound is partly to blame; sterling is up 0.5% right not over 
$1.26.

 Joshua Mahony, market analyst at IG, explains that Brexit anxiety has faded 
this week.

If FTSE bulls were emboldened by Wednesday’s incredible fightback to regain 
the 7000 mark, they will be feeling somewhat weary today, as the UK benchmark 
suffered substantial losses amid a comprehensive recovery for sterling.

The pound was expected to rise on last week’s realisation that Article 50 is 
now in the hands of Brexit-sceptic MPs, and with the US election now out of the 
way, we are seeing that pound rebound take shape. Much like a weakening euro 
was perceived to be good for UK stocks, today’s pound rally is doing little to 
help the FTSE, which has suffered more than most.

Most other European stock markets also closed in the red, and Wall Street is 
still down
 . Photograph: Thomson Reuters 
As flagged up earlier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/11/emerging-markets-currencies-trump-anxiety-bond-selloff-stock-markets-live?page=with:block-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b#block-5825e5c7e4b05c05c52f3d7b>
, analysts believe Europe will suffer if Trump does manage to boostUS growth 
through tax cuts and a spending boost.

Jasper Lawler of CMC Markets says:

The new Donald Trump vision for America is drawing the attention of 
international capital. This renewed belief in a better environment for 
corporate America is at the expense of Europe and especially emerging markets.

The City is also concerned by the heavy losses in the bond market this week 
<https://twitter.com/Schuldensuehner/status/796983323256061952/photo/1?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
, which wiped out around $1trn. That, funnily enough, is also how much has been 
added to the US equities market this week, according to Bloomberg.
  Photograph: Warren Buffett 
Billionaire investor Warren Buffett says income inequality helped to drive 
Donald Trump to the White House.

In an interview with CNN, Buffett, who has called for tax reform in the past, 
says ordinary Americans feel that wealth distribution is unfair:

The Forbes 400 [list of wealthiest Americans] had $93bn dollars in 1982, and 
they’ve got 2.4 trillion dollars today. That’s 25 times as much.

If you’ve been working 40 hours a week, maybe holding a second job and you 
work with the Little League [junior baseball] and you’ve been a good parent, 
and you’re really struggling.

Then you think, “What’s wrong with this picture?”, and you want to change the 
picture.

Buffett, worth an estimated $70bn, also criticises Trump’s criticism of free 
trade, saying protectionism would harm the US economy.

But while Buffett isn’t a fan of Trump, he’s now calling on Americans to back 
the president-elect. Unity, he says, is now crucial, after a particularly 
negative and personal campaign:

It’s every important that the American people coalesce behind a president.

That doesn’t mean they can’t criticise, or disagree with what he’s doing. But 
we need a country unified by a president.

Buffett also warns that Trump can’t deliver on all his pledges, such as 
doubling economic growth.

“Nobody can grow the economy 4% in real terms over time...The math is too 
extraordinary.”

The full interview is online here 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/11/11/investing/warren-buffett-donald-trump-stock/>.
Poppy Harlow (@PoppyHarlowCNN) 
Buffett after Trump win: '100%' optimistic about America. My full conversation 
w/@WarrenBuffett <https://twitter.com/WarrenBuffett> on the election: 
https://t.co/fIR5WOHTim <https://t.co/fIR5WOHTim>
 <https://twitter.com/PoppyHarlowCNN/status/797105933889470465> November 11, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/PoppyHarlowCNN/status/797105933889470465>  
Speaking of Europe... Trade commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom suggested today 
that talks with the US about the controversial TTIP agreement will probably be 
‘frozen’ for a while now.

Malmstrom told reporters in Brussels that:

“There will be a natural pause, of course, while we wait for the next 
administration; then, for quite some time TTIP will probably be in the freezer.

Then what happens when it’s defrosted, I think we will need to wait and see.”
Duncan Robinson (@duncanrobinson) 
Malmstrom: "I don’t think we see the resumption of any TTIP negotiation in 
quite a long time.”
 <https://twitter.com/duncanrobinson/status/797086127865954304> November 11, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/duncanrobinson/status/797086127865954304>  
This week can’t end enough for City traders, who are sending shares steadily 
lower in London.

The FTSE 100 is now down 116 points, or -1.7%, at 6712. 

Precious metals firms are leading the rout, along with oil companies and major 
exporters.
Mike van Dulken (@Accendo_Mike) 
#FTSE100 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/FTSE100?src=hash> lows of the week. Risk 
off into the weekend to complete bearish flag?
 <https://twitter.com/Accendo_Mike/status/797106287590916100> November 11, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/Accendo_Mike/status/797106287590916100>  
Germany is defying the global market selloff today, with its DAX index 
slightly higher.

That’s partly thanks to Deutsche Bank, whose shares have surged over 4% today. 
There’s speculation that the German lender has a better chance of negotiating a 
lower penalty with the US Department of Justice, over misconduct before the 
financial crisis.

Deutsche should also benefit from a higher inflation environment; record low 
interest rates have hurt its profitability.

Its share plunged through €10 at the end of September, on fears over its 
financial health. They’re now worth €14.7
 
Europe’s biggest threat from the Trump presidency is a new trade war that 
scuppers exports and growth, says Kallum Pickering of Germany’s Berenberg bank.

He writes:

Europe earns almost 20% of its GDP from exports, that is 50% more than the US 
[see chart below].

European producers would feel the pinch of a more inward-looking and less 
trade-oriented US. A US shift towards isolationism over the next four years 
that might then be mirrored by other countries is the major economic risk for 
Europe following the Trump victory.

If Trump does what he said in the campaign, namely brand China as a currency 
manipulator and place a 45% punitive tariff on Chinese imports, he could 
trigger a trade war. While Congress would block many of his more extreme policy 
proposals, such a move would badly exacerbate a tilt in the Western world 
against globalisation. Trade oriented economies like those of Europe would lose 
even more from that than the US.

 Photograph: Berenberg   The statue of George Washington at Federal Hall adjacent to the New York Stock 
Exchange. Photograph: Bryan R. Smith/AFP/Getty Images 
After several days of gains, the US stock market appears to be readjusting to 
the new reality.


Some of the shares that have done best since Donald Trump won the election are 
leading the fallers.

That includes drugs firms Pfizer (-2%) and Merck (-1%), who had posted gains 
after the prospect of a price-gouging clampdown faded with Hillary Clinton’s 
victory chances.

Exxon Mobile is down 1.8% -- it had been another Trump gainer, as the next 
president is relaxed about the dangers of climate change.

And Caterpillar had lost 0.6%; having been driven up by the prospect of new 
orders for its digging machines to help build new American highways, airports 
and schools.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/23/Grumbling_Green_needs_to_understand_he_s_not_dealing_with_a_legal_process.txt

On one small point, one can sympathise with Sir Philip Green. Frank Field, 
chair of one of the committees exploring the downfall of BHS, didn’t have to 
say MPs “would laugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/12/mps-penalties-philip-green-attend-inquiry>
” if the billionaire retailer turns up on Wednesday with a proposal that puts 
less than £600m into the company’s pension fund. It would have been wiser to 
wait to see what Green says, rather than pronounce on what would provoke mirth.

But so what? The point the grumbling Green has overlooked is that he’s not 
dealing with a legal process, or even a regulatory investigation. He’s facing 
two crews of MPs who are free to comment as they wish during the course of 
their inquiries. There is no obligation on the parliamentarians to be polite, 
or to offer opinions only after hearing all the evidence.

Field’s remark, one suspects, was prompted by the rumour that Green was 
preparing to offer £150m directly toBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> pensioners. The chair of the work 
and pensions committee may have been indicating that such a proposal would be 
technically problematic. He’d be right. The size of the shortfall in the scheme 
– £571m, on one measure – means the Pension Protection Fund, which is funded by 
a levy on solvent defined benefit schemes, would still be on the hook for a 
very large sum. In other words, £150m might not be generous in context. Field’s 
phrasing may have been inelegant but, to use a Green phrase, that’s showbiz.

Indeed, the Topshop <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/topshop> tycoon 
hasn’t helped himself by saying next to nothing since the collapse of BHS. He 
could have issued a statement giving his version of events at any time. He 
could have disputed any of the allegations made by witnesses. Instead, he’s 
stayed silent even as his original claim to have sold BHS in a good condition 
to a credible buyer has been steadily undermined.

Green chose former bankrupt Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dominic-chappell> as a purchaser and, 
given the rapid collapse of BHS and the shortfall faced by pensioners, he 
should not be surprised that answers are being demanded. If Wednesday has 
assumed the status of a “showdown”, Green is primarily to blame.

He will – let’s hope – drop his silly threats not to appear. A no-show would 
provoke attempts to strip him of his knighthood, which really would be an 
arbitrary process, and would not stop parliament trying to assert its 
authority. The bald facts for Green should be very simple: you’re a British 
citizen and MPs wish to ask you legitimate questions, saying no is not an 
option.

Changing Clarkes won’t be enough for Asda

Once upon a time, Walmart <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wal-mart> used 
to boast about its pride in owning Asda, citing the many trading ideas it had 
re-imported back to the US. The UK was regarded as the best of its foreign 
adventures.

These days, it’s almost as if Asda is viewed as an errant child whose 
existence has to be acknowledged in round-robin dispatches, but not dwelled 
upon.Asda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> wasn’t even mentioned by 
name in the latest quarterly update to shareholders. Instead, there was a 
general grumble about how “a highly competitive environment and food deflation 
in the UK continued to challenge the market”.

That environment is now so entrenched that even head office in Arkansas thinks 
something needs to be done. Asda chief executiveAndy Clarke is out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/asda-replaces-ceo-andy-clarke-walmart-china-chief-sean-clarke>
, to be replaced by Sean Clarke, who has earned his spurs running Walmart China.

Changing Clarkes does not, in itself, signal a change of strategy. For that to 
happen, Walmart will have to acknowledge that the current softly-softly attempt 
to lower Asda’s prices, while protecting its profit margins, is a flop. 
Like-for-like sales have fallen for seven quarters in a row. Aldi andLidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> have been the beneficiaries.

The cure is permanently lower profit margins, to provide financial firepower 
to combat the discounters. Tesco andMorrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> have been dragged into that 
battle, and the scars show in their battered share prices. The grocery game is 
just less profitable than it was.

If Asda is now preparing to lead a price war, the stakes will be raised again. 
But don’t assume that outcome is inevitable. Walmart could have given Asda a 
licence to be more aggressive several years ago. Changing the local boss may 
herald a change of heart. But it could turn out to be another cop-out – an easy 
way to avoid making a hard decision on prices.

LinkedIn accepts Microsoft’s generous invitation

LinkedIn is a networking website where ambitious office-workers go to make 
over-extended boasts about their professional achievements and ambitions. The 
company’s management lives by the same philosophy.Selling LinkedIn to Microsoft 
for $26.2bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/linkedins-rapid-14-year-growth-led-to-262bn-microsoft-deal>
 is, apparently, a “refounding moment” that “gives us a chance to change the 
way the world works”.

Cut to the chase, chaps: you’ve played a blinder. You’ve extracted a monstrous 
price – a 50% premium to the old share price – by finding a buyer with an 
excess of cash and a shortage of ideas about how to protect its dominance in 
professional computing. Congratulations, it’s a terrific deal from the seller’s 
point of view. But howLinkedIn <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/linkedin>
 can be worth $60 per member, including the inactive ones, is a mystery.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/23/Neoliberalism___the_ideology_at_the_root_of_all_our_problems.txt

Imagine if the people of the Soviet Union had never heard of communism. The 
ideology that dominates our lives has, for most of us, no name. Mention it in 
conversation and you’ll be rewarded with a shrug. Even if your listeners have 
heard the term before, they will struggle to define it. Neoliberalism: do you 
know what it is?

Its anonymity is both a symptom and cause of its power. It has played a major 
role in a remarkable variety of crises: thefinancial meltdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-crisis> of 2007‑8, the 
offshoring of wealth and power, of which thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> offer us merely a 
glimpse, the slow collapse of public health and education, resurgent child 
poverty,the epidemic of loneliness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/14/age-of-loneliness-killing-us>
, the collapse of ecosystems, the rise ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. But we respond to these 
crises as if they emerge in isolation, apparently unaware that they have all 
been either catalysed or exacerbated by the same coherent philosophy; a 
philosophy that has – or had – a name. What greater power can there be than to 
operate namelessly?

Inequality is recast as virtuous. The market ensures that everyone gets what 
they deserve.

So pervasive has neoliberalism become that we seldom even recognise it as an 
ideology. We appear to accept the proposition that this utopian, millenarian 
faith describes a neutral force; a kind of biological law, like Darwin’s theory 
of evolution. But the philosophy arose as a conscious attempt to reshape human 
life and shift the locus of power.

Neoliberalism sees competition as the defining characteristic of human 
relations. It redefines citizens as consumers, whose democratic choices are 
best exercised by buying and selling, a process that rewards merit and punishes 
inefficiency. It maintains that “the market” delivers benefits that could never 
be achieved by planning.

Attempts to limit competition are treated as inimical to liberty. Tax and 
regulation should be minimised, public services should be privatised. The 
organisation of labour and collective bargaining bytrade unions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tradeunions> are portrayed as market 
distortions that impede the formation of a natural hierarchy of winners and 
losers. Inequality is recast as virtuous: a reward for utility and a generator 
of wealth, which trickles down to enrich everyone. Efforts to create a more 
equal society are both counterproductive and morally corrosive. The market 
ensures that everyone gets what they deserve.

We internalise and reproduce its creeds. The rich persuade themselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/07/one-per-cent-wealth-destroyers>
 that they acquired their wealth through merit, ignoring the advantages – such 
as education, inheritance and class – that may have helped to secure it. The 
poor begin to blame themselves for their failures, even when they can do little 
to change their circumstances.

Never mind structural unemployment: if you don’t have a job it’s because you 
are unenterprising. Never mind the impossible costs of housing: if your credit 
card is maxed out, you’re feckless and improvident. Never mind that your 
children no longer have a school playing field: if they get fat, it’s your 
fault. In a world governed by competition, those who fall behind become defined 
and self-defined as losers.

Neoliberalism has brought out the worst in us | Paul Verhaeghe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/29/neoliberalism-economic-system-ethics-personality-psychopathicsthic>
Among the results, as Paul Verhaeghe documents in his book What About Me? are 
epidemics of self-harm, eating disorders, depression, loneliness, performance 
anxiety and social phobia. Perhaps it’s unsurprising that Britain, in which 
neoliberal ideology has been most rigorously applied, isthe loneliness capital 
of Europe 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/10909524/Britain-the-loneliness-capital-of-Europe.html>
. We are all neoliberals now.

***

The term neoliberalism was coined at a meeting in Paris in 1938. Among the 
delegates were two men who came to define the ideology, Ludwig von Mises and 
Friedrich Hayek. Both exiles from Austria, they saw social democracy, 
exemplified by Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal and the gradual development of 
Britain’s welfare state, as manifestations of a collectivism that occupied the 
same spectrum as nazism and communism.

In The Road to Serfdom, published in 1944, Hayek argued that government 
planning, by crushing individualism, would lead inexorably to totalitarian 
control. Like Mises’s bookBureaucracy, The Road to Serfdom was widely read. It 
came to the attention of some very wealthy people, who saw in the philosophy an 
opportunity to free themselves from regulation and tax. When, in 1947, Hayek 
founded the first organisation that would spread the doctrine of neoliberalism 
– theMont Pelerin Society <https://www.montpelerin.org/> – it was supported 
financially by millionaires and their foundations.

With their help, he began to create what Daniel Stedman Jones describes in 
Masters of the Universe as “a kind of neoliberal international”: a 
transatlantic network of academics, businessmen, journalists and activists. The 
movement’s rich backers funded aseries of thinktanks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/30/list-thinktanks-uk> which 
would refine and promote the ideology. Among them were theAmerican Enterprise 
Institute <http://www.aei.org/>, the Heritage Foundation 
<http://www.heritage.org/>, the Cato Institute <http://www.cato.org/>, the 
Institute of Economic Affairs <http://www.iea.org.uk/>, the Centre for Policy 
Studies <http://www.cps.org.uk/> and the Adam Smith Institute 
<http://www.adamsmith.org/>. They also financed academic positions and 
departments, particularly at the universities of Chicago and Virginia.

As it evolved, neoliberalism became more strident. Hayek’s view that 
governments should regulate competition to prevent monopolies from forming gave 
way – among American apostles such asMilton Friedman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/nov/17/guardianobituaries.politics> – to 
the belief that monopoly power could be seen as a reward for efficiency.

Something else happened during this transition: the movement lost its name. In 
1951, Friedman was happy todescribe himself as a neoliberal 
<http://0055d26.netsolhost.com/friedman/pdfs/other_commentary/Farmand.02.17.1951.pdf>
. But soon after that, the term began to disappear. Stranger still, even as the 
ideology became crisper and the movement more coherent, the lost name was not 
replaced by any common alternative.

At first, despite its lavish funding, neoliberalism remained at the margins. 
The postwar consensus was almost universal:John Maynard Keynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/john-maynard-keynes>’s economic 
prescriptions were widely applied, full employment and the relief of poverty 
were common goals in the US and much of western Europe, top rates of tax were 
high and governments sought social outcomes without embarrassment, developing 
new public services and safety nets.

But in the 1970s, when Keynesian policies began to fall apart and economic 
crises struck on both sides of the Atlantic, neoliberal ideas began to enter 
the mainstream. As Friedman remarked, “when the time came that you had to 
change ... there was an alternative ready there to be picked up”. With the help 
of sympathetic journalists and political advisers, elements of neoliberalism, 
especially its prescriptions for monetary policy, were adopted by Jimmy 
Carter’s administration in the US and Jim Callaghan’s government in Britain.

It may seem strange that a doctrine promising choice should have been promoted 
with the slogan 'there is no alternative'

After Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan took power, the rest of the package 
soon followed: massive tax cuts for the rich, the crushing of trade unions, 
deregulation, privatisation, outsourcing and competition in public services. 
Through the IMF, the World Bank, the Maastricht treaty and the World Trade 
Organisation, neoliberal policies were imposed – often without democratic 
consent – on much of the world. Most remarkable was its adoption among parties 
that once belonged to the left: Labour and the Democrats, for example. As 
Stedman Jones notes, “it is hard to think of another utopia to have been as 
fully realised.”

***

It may seem strange that a doctrine promising choice and freedom should have 
been promoted with the slogan “there is no alternative”. But,as Hayek remarked 
<http://www.counterpunch.org/2006/11/17/the-road-from-serfdom/> on a visit to 
Pinochet’s Chile – one of the first nations in which the programme was 
comprehensively applied – “my personal preference leans toward a liberal 
dictatorship rather than toward a democratic government devoid of liberalism”. 
The freedom that neoliberalism offers, which sounds so beguiling when expressed 
in general terms, turns out to mean freedom for the pike, not for the minnows.

Freedom from trade unions and collective bargaining means the freedom to 
suppress wages. Freedom from regulation means thefreedom to poison rivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/georgemonbiot/2015/nov/12/toothless-environment-agency-is-allowing-the-living-world-to-be-wrecked-with-impunity>
, endanger workers, charge iniquitous rates of interest and design exotic 
financial instruments. Freedom from tax means freedom from the distribution of 
wealth that lifts people out of poverty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08ffcf400cb8a96c3aa28b6341fdd8c5f9a77ca0%2F0_117_3258_1955%2F3258.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Neoliberalism%20%E2%80%93%20the%20ideology%20at%20the%20root%20of%20all%20our%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Neoliberalism%20%E2%80%93%20the%20ideology%20at%20the%20root%20of%20all%20our%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08ffcf400cb8a96c3aa28b6341fdd8c5f9a77ca0%2F0_117_3258_1955%2F3258.jpg>
 Naomi Klein documented that neoliberals advocated the use of crises to impose 
unpopular policies while people were distracted. Photograph: Anya Chibis for 
the Guardian 
As Naomi Klein documents in The Shock Doctrine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/sep/15/politics>, neoliberal theorists 
advocated the use of crises to impose unpopular policies while people were 
distracted: for example, in the aftermath of Pinochet’s coup, the Iraq war and 
Hurricane Katrina, which Friedman described as “an opportunity to radically 
reform the educational system” inNew Orleans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/hurricane-katrina-10-years-on>.

Where neoliberal policies cannot be imposed domestically, they are imposed 
internationally, through trade treaties incorporating “investor-state dispute 
settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/04/us-trade-deal-full-frontal-assault-on-democracy>
”: offshore tribunals in which corporations can press for the removal of social 
and environmental protections. When parliaments have voted to restrict sales of
cigarettes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/hurricane-katrina-10-years-on>, 
protect water supplies from mining companies, freeze energy bills or prevent 
pharmaceutical firms from ripping off the state, corporations have sued, often 
successfully. Democracy is reduced to theatre.

Neoliberalism was not conceived as a self-serving racket, but it rapidly 
became one

Another paradox of neoliberalism is that universal competition relies upon 
universal quantification and comparison. The result is that workers, 
job-seekers and public services of every kind are subject to a pettifogging, 
stifling regime of assessment and monitoring, designed to identify the winners 
and punish the losers. The doctrine that Von Mises proposed would free us from 
the bureaucratic nightmare of central planning has instead created one.

Neoliberalism was not conceived as a self-serving racket, but it rapidly 
became one. Economic growth has been markedly slower in the neoliberal era 
(since 1980 in Britain and the US) than it was in the preceding decades; but 
not for the very rich. Inequality in the distribution of both income and 
wealth, after 60 years of decline, rose rapidly in this era, due to the 
smashing of trade unions, tax reductions, rising rents, privatisation and 
deregulation.

The privatisation or marketisation of public services such as energy, water, 
trains, health, education, roads and prisons has enabled corporations to set up 
tollbooths in front of essential assets and charge rent, either to citizens or 
to government, for their use. Rent is another term for unearned income. When 
you pay an inflated price for a train ticket, only part of the fare compensates 
the operators for the money they spend on fuel, wages, rolling stock and other 
outlays. The rest reflects the fact thatthey have you over a barrel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/04/rail-privatisation-train-operators-profit>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05320d557663eb6197cb76e161859a4a09c807a1%2F0_0_2726_2049%2F2726.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Neoliberalism%20%E2%80%93%20the%20ideology%20at%20the%20root%20of%20all%20our%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Neoliberalism%20%E2%80%93%20the%20ideology%20at%20the%20root%20of%20all%20our%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05320d557663eb6197cb76e161859a4a09c807a1%2F0_0_2726_2049%2F2726.jpg>
 In Mexico, Carlos Slim was granted control of almost all phone services and 
soon became the world’s richest man. Photograph: Henry Romero/Reuters 
Those who own and run the UK’s privatised or semi-privatised services make 
stupendous fortunes by investing little and charging much. In Russia and India, 
oligarchs acquired state assets through firesales. In Mexico,Carlos Slim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/06/carlos-slim-biography-diego-enrique-osorno-interviews>
 was granted control of almost all landline and mobile phone services and soon 
became the world’s richest man.

Financialisation, as Andrew Sayer notes in Why We Can’t Afford the Rich 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/347173/>, has had a 
similar impact. “Like rent,” he argues, “interest is ... unearned income that 
accrues without any effort”. As the poor become poorer and the rich become 
richer, the rich acquire increasing control over another crucial asset: money. 
Interest payments, overwhelmingly, are a transfer of money from the poor to the 
rich. As property prices and the withdrawal of state funding load people with 
debt (think of the switch from student grants to student loans), the banks and 
their executives clean up.

Sayer argues that the past four decades have been characterised by a transfer 
of wealth not only from the poor to the rich, but within the ranks of the 
wealthy: from those who make their money by producing new goods or services to 
those who make their money by controlling existing assets and harvesting rent, 
interest or capital gains. Earned income has been supplanted by unearned income.

Neoliberal policies are everywhere beset by market failures. Not only are the 
banks too big to fail, but so are the corporations now charged with delivering 
public services. As Tony Judt pointed out inIll Fares the Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/11/ill-fares-land-tony-judt>, Hayek 
forgot that vital national services cannot be allowed to collapse, which means 
that competition cannot run its course. Business takes the profits, the state 
keeps the risk.

The greater the failure, the more extreme the ideology becomes. Governments 
use neoliberal crises as both excuse and opportunity to cut taxes, privatise 
remaining public services, rip holes in the social safety net, deregulate 
corporations and re-regulate citizens. The self-hating state now sinks its 
teeth into every organ of the public sector.

Perhaps the most dangerous impact of neoliberalism is not the economic crises 
it has caused, but the political crisis. As the domain of the state is reduced, 
our ability to change the course of our lives through voting also contracts. 
Instead, neoliberal theory asserts, people can exercise choice through 
spending. But some have more to spend than others: in the great consumer or 
shareholder democracy, votes are not equally distributed. The result is a 
disempowerment of the poor and middle. As parties of the right andformer left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/series/looking-back-on-new-labour> adopt 
similar neoliberal policies, disempowerment turns to disenfranchisement. Large 
numbers of people have been shed from politics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36a15aa395ab7f962a249b9a7de5afde71c686e8%2F0_84_3208_1924%2F3208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Neoliberalism%20%E2%80%93%20the%20ideology%20at%20the%20root%20of%20all%20our%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Neoliberalism%20%E2%80%93%20the%20ideology%20at%20the%20root%20of%20all%20our%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36a15aa395ab7f962a249b9a7de5afde71c686e8%2F0_84_3208_1924%2F3208.jpg>
 Slogans, symbols and sensation … Donald Trump. Photograph: Aaron 
Josefczyk/Reuters 
Chris Hedges remarks 
<http://www.truthdig.com/report/item/the_revenge_of_the_lower_classes_and_the_rise_of_american_fascism_20160302>
 that “fascist movements build their base not from the politically active but 
the politically inactive, the ‘losers’ who feel, often correctly, they have no 
voice or role to play in the political establishment”. When political debate no 
longer speaks to us, people become responsiveinstead to slogans, symbols and 
sensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/04/genius-donald-trumpspeak-steven-poole-words>
. To the admirers of Trump, for example, facts and arguments appear irrelevant.

Judt explained that when the thick mesh of interactions between people and the 
state has been reduced to nothing but authority and obedience, the only 
remaining force that binds us is state power. The totalitarianism Hayek feared 
is more likely to emerge when governments, having lost the moral authority that 
arises from the delivery of public services, are reduced to “cajoling, 
threatening and ultimately coercing people to obey them”.

***

Like communism, neoliberalism is the God that failed. But the zombie doctrine 
staggers on, and one of the reasons is its anonymity. Or rather, a cluster of 
anonymities.

The invisible doctrine of the invisible hand is promoted by invisible backers. 
Slowly, very slowly, we have begun to discover the names of a few of them. We 
find that the Institute of Economic Affairs, which has argued forcefully in the 
media against the further regulation of the tobacco industry,has been secretly 
funded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/17/media-big-tobacco-lobbyists-bbc-cigarette-packs>
 by British American Tobacco since 1963. We discover thatCharles and David Koch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/koch-brothers>, two of the richest men in 
the world, founded the institute that set up theTea Party movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2010/oct/25/tea-party-koch-brothers>
. We find that Charles Koch, in establishing one of his thinktanks,noted that 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2016/03/10/koch-brothers-new-brand/> “in order 
to avoid undesirable criticism, how the organisation is controlled and directed 
should not be widely advertised”.

The nouveau riche were once disparaged by those who had inherited their money. 
Today, the relationship has been reversed

The words used by neoliberalism often conceal more than they elucidate. “The 
market” sounds like a natural system that might bear upon us equally, like 
gravity or atmospheric pressure. But it is fraught with power relations. What 
“the market wants” tends to mean what corporations and their bosses want. 
“Investment”, as Sayer notes, means two quite different things. One is the 
funding of productive and socially useful activities, the other is the purchase 
of existing assets to milk them for rent, interest, dividends and capital 
gains. Using the same word for different activities “camouflages the sources of 
wealth”, leading us to confuse wealth extraction with wealth creation.

A century ago, the nouveau riche were disparaged by those who had inherited 
their money. Entrepreneurs sought social acceptance by passing themselves off 
as rentiers. Today, the relationship has been reversed: the rentiers and 
inheritors style themselves entre preneurs. They claim to have earned their 
unearned income.

These anonymities and confusions mesh with the namelessness and placelessness 
of modern capitalism: the franchise model which ensures that workersdo not know 
for whom they toil 
<http://maidinlondonnow.blogspot.co.uk/2015_08_01_archive.html>; the companies 
registered through a network of offshore secrecy regimes so complex thateven 
the police cannot discover the beneficial owners 
<http://www.andywightman.com/archives/4377>; the tax arrangements that 
bamboozle governments; the financial products no one understands.

The anonymity of neoliberalism is fiercely guarded. Those who are influenced 
by Hayek, Mises and Friedman tend to reject the term, maintaining – with some 
justice – that it is used todayonly pejoratively 
<https://twitter.com/georgemonbiot/status/530351056530980864>. But they offer 
us no substitute. Some describe themselves as classical liberals or 
libertarians, but these descriptions are both misleading and curiously 
self-effacing, as they suggest that there is nothing novel aboutThe Road to 
Serfdom, Bureaucracy or Friedman’s classic work, Capitalism and Freedom.

***

For all that, there is something admirable about the neoliberal project, at 
least in its early stages. It was a distinctive, innovative philosophy promoted 
by a coherent network of thinkers and activists with a clear plan of action. It 
was patient and persistent.The Road to Serfdom became the path to power.

Neoliberalism, Locke and the Green party | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/24/neoliberalism-locke-and-the-green-party>
Neoliberalism’s triumph also reflects the failure of the left. When 
laissez-faire economics led to catastrophe in 1929, Keynes devised a 
comprehensive economic theory to replace it. When Keynesian demand management 
hit the buffers in the 70s, there was an alternative ready. But when 
neoliberalism fell apart in 2008 there was ... nothing. This is why the zombie 
walks. The left and centre have produced no new general framework of economic 
thought for 80 years.

Every invocation of Lord Keynes is an admission of failure. To propose 
Keynesian solutions to the crises of the 21st century is to ignore three 
obvious problems. It is hard to mobilise people around old ideas; the flaws 
exposed in the 70s have not gone away; and, most importantly, they have nothing 
to say about our gravest predicament: the environmental crisis. Keynesianism 
works by stimulating consumer demand to promote economic growth. Consumer 
demand and economic growth are the motors of environmental destruction.

What the history of both Keynesianism and neoliberalism show is that it’s not 
enough to oppose a broken system. A coherent alternative has to be proposed. 
For Labour, the Democrats and the wider left, the central task should be to 
develop an economic Apollo programme, a conscious attempt to design a new 
system, tailored to the demands of the 21st century.

• George Monbiot’s How Did We Get into This Mess? is published this month by 
Verso. To order a copy for £12.99 (RRP £16.99) ) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/381048/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 --------- BEGINNING NEW FILE ../guardian/23/Pound_and_shares_rally_after_two_days_of_record_Brexit_losses___as_it_happened.txt

6.14pm BST 18:14  <> 

European markets end higher

The volatility suffered by stock markets in recent days is unlikely to ease in 
the near future. The day saw a rebound following the sharp declines which came 
in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote, but the City is reluctant to bet 
too strongly on where markets go from here. Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at 
Hargreaves Lansdown, said:

It would be premature to call the bottom of the market, prices are still 
adjusting to the post-Brexit world, and it would be foolhardy to rule out 
further price swings.

The bounce in the Footsie does show there are buyers out there who are 
swooping in when prices fall sufficiently, but markets neither go up, or down, 
in a straight line, and things may yet have to get worse before they get better.

Valuations on the UK stock market look in the middle of their historical 
range, which suggests it’s a reasonable time to put money in the market if you 
are a long term investor. But given the current volatility, you need to be 
willing to stomach further price falls, if you are dipping a toe in.

The final scores showed:

 * The FTSE 100 finished up 2.64% or 158.19 points at 6140.39 
 * Germany’s Dax added 1.93% to 9447.28 
 * France’s Cac closed 2.61% higher at 4088.85 
 * Italy’s FTSE MIB rose 3.3% to 15601.62 
 * Spain’s Ibex ended up 2.48% at 7835.0 
 * In Greece, the Athens market added 3.72% to 538.65 
On Wall Street, the Dow Jones Industrial Average is currently up 148 points or 
0.87%.

As for the pound, it is now up 0.9% at $1.3342 after climbing as high as 
$1.3418. Against the euro it is 0.68% higher at €1.2075.

On that note, it’s time to close up for the day. Thanks for all your comments, 
and we’ll be back tomorrow.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a584e4b0fbc399c13727%23block-5772a584e4b0fbc399c13727>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a584e4b0fbc399c13727%23block-5772a584e4b0fbc399c13727>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a584e4b0fbc399c13727%23block-5772a584e4b0fbc399c13727&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a584e4b0fbc399c13727%23block-5772a584e4b0fbc399c13727>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a584e4b0fbc399c13727%23block-5772a584e4b0fbc399c13727>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a584e4b0fbc399c13727%23block-5772a584e4b0fbc399c13727&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
6.05pm BST 18:05  <> 

ECB president Mario Draghi has said Brexit could reduce European GDP by up to 
0.5 percentage points, according to a document seen by Bloomberg.
Livesquawk (@Livesquawk) 
[BREAKING] #ECB <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ECB?src=hash>'s Draghi sees 
slower growth for the Euro-area over next 3-yrs; could cut growth by 0.5%
 <https://twitter.com/Livesquawk/status/747833125133238272> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Livesquawk/status/747833125133238272> Mohamed A. El-Erian 
(@elerianm) 
Via @Business <https://twitter.com/business> : @ECB <https://twitter.com/ecb> 
President#Draghi <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Draghi?src=hash> suggests that 
#Brexit <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Brexit?src=hash> could reduce #Europe 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Europe?src=hash> #growth 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/growth?src=hash> rate by as much as 0.50 
percentage points.
 <https://twitter.com/elerianm/status/747833477723152384> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/elerianm/status/747833477723152384> Sigma Squawk 
(@SigmaSquawk) 
ECB's Draghi: Brexit recession will affect FX markets
 <https://twitter.com/SigmaSquawk/status/747838115595837441> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SigmaSquawk/status/747838115595837441> Sigma Squawk 
(@SigmaSquawk) 
ECB's Draghi: Concerned Brexit will lead to competitive devaluations
 <https://twitter.com/SigmaSquawk/status/747838096654405632> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SigmaSquawk/status/747838096654405632> Bloomberg TV 
(@BloombergTV) 
JUST IN: Draghi sees #Brexit <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Brexit?src=hash> 
cutting Euro GDP by as much as 0.5%, document showshttps://t.co/H89WE9USD2 
<https://t.co/H89WE9USD2> https://t.co/7x8MPiK8Yf <https://t.co/7x8MPiK8Yf>
 <https://twitter.com/BloombergTV/status/747833571864305664> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BloombergTV/status/747833571864305664> 
Updated at 6.07pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772ad71e4b0757c9f603856%23block-5772ad71e4b0757c9f603856>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772ad71e4b0757c9f603856%23block-5772ad71e4b0757c9f603856>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772ad71e4b0757c9f603856%23block-5772ad71e4b0757c9f603856&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772ad71e4b0757c9f603856%23block-5772ad71e4b0757c9f603856>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772ad71e4b0757c9f603856%23block-5772ad71e4b0757c9f603856>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772ad71e4b0757c9f603856%23block-5772ad71e4b0757c9f603856&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.40pm BST 17:40  <> 

Here’s the full Reuters report on the meeting between business leaders and 
government minister Sajid Javid:

Britain appears a long way from developing a clear plan on the country’s 
future trading relationship with the European Union, the head of the 
Confederation of British Industry (CBI) said on Tuesday after a meeting with 
government.

CBI Director-General Carolyn Fairbairn said some firms were putting investment 
on hold after Britain’s vote to leave the EU last week, and that they needed a 
clearer sense of what the government intended to do.

“It’s incredibly early days. I don’t think anybody’s coming out of these 
meetings feeling great, but they are coming out with a sense of resolve,” she 
told reporters.

“We’re a long way off having a plan and leadership and that is still where we 
will be continuing to make (the point) that this is what businesses need,” she 
added.

Fairbairn said businesses expressed very high levels of real and genuine 
concern to business minister Sajid Javid, who had called the meeting, and that 
the government also needed to address the fears of EU migrants employed in 
Britain.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a825e4b0c8ad6795dee3%23block-5772a825e4b0c8ad6795dee3>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a825e4b0c8ad6795dee3%23block-5772a825e4b0c8ad6795dee3>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a825e4b0c8ad6795dee3%23block-5772a825e4b0c8ad6795dee3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a825e4b0c8ad6795dee3%23block-5772a825e4b0c8ad6795dee3>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a825e4b0c8ad6795dee3%23block-5772a825e4b0c8ad6795dee3>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a825e4b0c8ad6795dee3%23block-5772a825e4b0c8ad6795dee3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.16pm BST 17:16  <> 

At the meeting between business leaders and the government, there were high 
levels of real concern following the Brexit vote according to the CBI.

Reuters reports the CBI saying that the government needed to develop a plan on 
the country’s trading relationship with the EU very quickly. Businesses also 
wanted the government to get on with major infrastructure projects which are 
already underway. There were also concerns about rising prices, housing, and 
the insecurity being felt by migrant workers in the UK.

The CBI director general said a number of firms had put investment on hold, 
said Reuters, and said the meeting did not feel great but there was a sense of 
resolve.

Updated at 5.26pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a1d7e4b0c8ad6795dec1%23block-5772a1d7e4b0c8ad6795dec1>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a1d7e4b0c8ad6795dec1%23block-5772a1d7e4b0c8ad6795dec1>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a1d7e4b0c8ad6795dec1%23block-5772a1d7e4b0c8ad6795dec1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a1d7e4b0c8ad6795dec1%23block-5772a1d7e4b0c8ad6795dec1>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a1d7e4b0c8ad6795dec1%23block-5772a1d7e4b0c8ad6795dec1>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772a1d7e4b0c8ad6795dec1%23block-5772a1d7e4b0c8ad6795dec1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.56pm BST 16:56  <> 

After two days of panic leading shares have regained a little of the lost 
ground. Joshua Mahony, market analyst at IG, said:

Today has seen a welcome reprieve from the incessant fear and risk aversion 
that has dominated financial markets since Friday’s unexpected referendum 
result. The question on everyone’s lips is whether we have seen an end to the 
selling, with many seeing current prices as an opportunity to buy their 
favourite firms at a temporary discount. [But] this selloff is unlikely to be 
over and perhaps the only thing that will truly raise risk appetite for good 
will be a faint glimmer of hope that we could see a second referendum.

Despite the binary nature of Friday’s referendum result, far from providing a 
definitive answer to the markets, we now find ourselves in the eye of a 
political and economic storm. We have moved from a position of security and 
stability, to one where we do not even know who will lead the two main 
political parties in a year’s time. David Cameron may have said that there is 
no way to go back on the referendum result, but Jeremy Hunt’s suggestion that 
he would hold a second referendum reminds us that crucially the decision is no 
longer Cameron’s to make.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57729d65e4b0fbc399c136ee%23block-57729d65e4b0fbc399c136ee>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57729d65e4b0fbc399c136ee%23block-57729d65e4b0fbc399c136ee>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57729d65e4b0fbc399c136ee%23block-57729d65e4b0fbc399c136ee&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57729d65e4b0fbc399c136ee%23block-57729d65e4b0fbc399c136ee>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57729d65e4b0fbc399c136ee%23block-57729d65e4b0fbc399c136ee>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57729d65e4b0fbc399c136ee%23block-57729d65e4b0fbc399c136ee&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.46pm BST 16:46  <> 

UK business secretary Sajid Javid says maintaining single market access will 
be his number one priority in negotiations with the EU. He says British access 
to the single market may not take the same form as other non-EU countries. He 
says the UK economy remains strong and over the past few days investors have 
reaffirmed their commitment to the UK.
Livesquawk (@Livesquawk) 
Javid says he will lead trade missions this year, will focus on maintaining 
single market access - that will be no.1 priority
 <https://twitter.com/Livesquawk/status/747814781256671232> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Livesquawk/status/747814781256671232> Dept for Business 
(@bisgovuk) 
.@SaijidJavid: Despite the current uncertainty, employer after employer has 
reaffirmed its commitment to the UKpic.twitter.com/E4ua243Psj 
<https://t.co/E4ua243Psj>
 <https://twitter.com/bisgovuk/status/747814928929677312> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bisgovuk/status/747814928929677312> 
Javid also said that a package of support for a potential buyer of the Port 
Talbot steel works was still available.

Updated at 5.03pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-577299e5e4b0cea1d7b04bfb%23block-577299e5e4b0cea1d7b04bfb>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-577299e5e4b0cea1d7b04bfb%23block-577299e5e4b0cea1d7b04bfb>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-577299e5e4b0cea1d7b04bfb%23block-577299e5e4b0cea1d7b04bfb&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-577299e5e4b0cea1d7b04bfb%23block-577299e5e4b0cea1d7b04bfb>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-577299e5e4b0cea1d7b04bfb%23block-577299e5e4b0cea1d7b04bfb>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-577299e5e4b0cea1d7b04bfb%23block-577299e5e4b0cea1d7b04bfb&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.26pm BST 16:26  <> 

US banks with significant UK operations are likely to act sooner rather than 
later to shift their operations,according to ratings agency Fitch 
<https://www.fitchratings.com/site/pressrelease?id=1008118>. It said:

The UK’s decision to leave the European Union will be disruptive for US global 
banks with significant operations in the UK and will weigh on their 
profitability in the short to medium term, Fitch Ratings says. However, the 
impact is likely to be moderate as we believe they will be able to operate 
through other EU legal entities.

US global banks are likely to start strategically implementing parts of their 
contingency plans rather than wait for trade and service arrangements to be 
agreed. Resolution planning for US global systemically important banks was 
constructive for their Brexit contingency planning because of the requirement 
to rationalize and understand their global legal entity structure and 
activities.


Restructuring operations will depend on license status in various 
jurisdictions, as well as establishing operational scale, potentially 
reallocating capital and relocating where trades and clients are booked. 
Relocation of staff is likely to follow; for example, ahead of the referendum, 
JP Morgan had announced that as many as 4,000 of its UK roles could be shifted 
out of the country.


Management will have to decide where to focus its European operations, 
depending on language requirements, staff expertise and incentives offered by 
these countries. Flexible labor laws will be important for US firms, so this 
may favor countries like Ireland and the Netherlands, rather than Germany and 
France.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57729633e4b0cea1d7b04bd3%23block-57729633e4b0cea1d7b04bd3>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57729633e4b0cea1d7b04bd3%23block-57729633e4b0cea1d7b04bd3>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57729633e4b0cea1d7b04bd3%23block-57729633e4b0cea1d7b04bd3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57729633e4b0cea1d7b04bd3%23block-57729633e4b0cea1d7b04bd3>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57729633e4b0cea1d7b04bd3%23block-57729633e4b0cea1d7b04bd3>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57729633e4b0cea1d7b04bd3%23block-57729633e4b0cea1d7b04bd3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.56pm BST 15:56  <> 

After cutting the UK’s credit rating from AAA to AA, Standard & Poor’s has 
said it had no plans to downgrade any other EU country in the wake of the 
Brexit vote.

But it said it would decide whether any UK bank ratings should be cut in the 
coming weeks. Reuters reports 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-britain-ratings-s-p-banks-idUSKCN0ZE1PQ?feedType=RSS&feedName=businessNews&utm_source=Twitter&utm_medium=Social&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+reuters%2FbusinessNews+%28Business+News%29>
:

“This does not lead to mechanical changes (in bank ratings),” S&P banking 
sector analyst Giles Edwards said on a webcast.

“But equally this (Brexit scenario) was not our base case... where we see a 
need to change ratings we will do so in the coming weeks.”

On other EU sovereign ratings, S&P’s global sovereign chief Moritz Kraemer 
said: “We have no intention of downgrading any other EU sovereign.”

S&P chopped the UK’s credit rating by two notches to AA and kept it on a 
‘negative outlook’ on Monday in the wake of last week’s vote to leave the 
European Union. It was the first time it had ever made such a deep cut to a 
top-rated sovereign.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728f98e4b0121e39336b72%23block-57728f98e4b0121e39336b72>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728f98e4b0121e39336b72%23block-57728f98e4b0121e39336b72>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728f98e4b0121e39336b72%23block-57728f98e4b0121e39336b72&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728f98e4b0121e39336b72%23block-57728f98e4b0121e39336b72>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728f98e4b0121e39336b72%23block-57728f98e4b0121e39336b72>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728f98e4b0121e39336b72%23block-57728f98e4b0121e39336b72&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.49pm BST 15:49  <> 

Here’s a link to video of Greek prime minister Alexis Tsipras arriving earlier 
at the European Council, warning the Brexit vote was a wake up call for Europe:
EU Council TV News (@EUCouncilTVNews) 
#EUCO <https://twitter.com/hashtag/EUCO?src=hash> Arrival and doorstep #Tsipras
 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Tsipras?src=hash> #GR 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GR?src=hash> @tsipras_eu 
<https://twitter.com/tsipras_eu> on #UKReferendum 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/UKReferendum?src=hash> #EUReferendum 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/EUReferendum?src=hash> #UKinEU 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/UKinEU?src=hash> https://t.co/VEJhWHLFiH 
<https://t.co/VEJhWHLFiH>
 <https://twitter.com/EUCouncilTVNews/status/747801941795831808> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/EUCouncilTVNews/status/747801941795831808> Alexis Tsipras 
(@tsipras_eu) 
Europe has reached a predictable crisis because of the democratic deficit, the 
absence of soc. cohesion & solidarityhttps://t.co/h1A2YKUIbb 
<https://t.co/h1A2YKUIbb>
 <https://twitter.com/tsipras_eu/status/747803912095268864> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/tsipras_eu/status/747803912095268864> 
Updated at 3.59pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728e43e4b0565db417b8e8%23block-57728e43e4b0565db417b8e8>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728e43e4b0565db417b8e8%23block-57728e43e4b0565db417b8e8>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728e43e4b0565db417b8e8%23block-57728e43e4b0565db417b8e8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728e43e4b0565db417b8e8%23block-57728e43e4b0565db417b8e8>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728e43e4b0565db417b8e8%23block-57728e43e4b0565db417b8e8>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728e43e4b0565db417b8e8%23block-57728e43e4b0565db417b8e8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.18pm BST 15:18  <> 

Arthur Neslen

More Brexit fallout. Siemens is putting new wind power investment plans in the 
UK on hold due to uncertainty caused by last week’s Brexit vote, theGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> energy company has told the 
Guardian. Arthur Neslen reports:

A £310m manufacturing hub in Hull that employs 1,000 people 
<http://www.rechargenews.com/wind/1435902/analysis-siemens-and-davey-fear-brexit-fall-out-for-uk-offshore-wind>
 will not be affected by the decision, and should still begin producing blades 
and assembling turbines next year.

But Siemens <https://www.theguardian.com/business/siemens>, one of the few 
firms to openly back a Remain vote, will not be making new investments until 
the future of the UK’s relationship with Europe becomes clearer.

Juergen Maier, the firm’s UK CEO, said that an existing blueprint to export 
offshore wind turbine machinery from the Hull hub was now up in the air.

Sign up to our EU referendum morning briefing <> Read more 

 He said: “Those plans were only beginning to happen and I expect that they 
will stall until we can work out exactly what the [new government’s] plan is, 
how we can participate in EU research programmes, and until all the issues 
around tariffs and trade have been sorted out.”

The full report is here:

Siemens freezes new UK wind power investment following Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/28/siemens-freezes-new-uk-wind-power-investment-following-brexit-vote>

 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sign-up>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728706e4b0565db417b8aa%23block-57728706e4b0565db417b8aa>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728706e4b0565db417b8aa%23block-57728706e4b0565db417b8aa>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728706e4b0565db417b8aa%23block-57728706e4b0565db417b8aa&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728706e4b0565db417b8aa%23block-57728706e4b0565db417b8aa>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728706e4b0565db417b8aa%23block-57728706e4b0565db417b8aa>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728706e4b0565db417b8aa%23block-57728706e4b0565db417b8aa&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.09pm BST 15:09  <> 

After higher than forecast US GDP figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/28/brexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live?page=with:block-57726df9e4b0aa06a3325b56#block-57726df9e4b0aa06a3325b56>
, comes a better than expected consumer confidence number.

According to the conference board, the consumer confidence index came in at 98 
in June, compared to 92.4 in the previous month and an expected 93.3. (This was 
before the outcome of the UK referendum of course.)
Bespoke (@bespokeinvest) 
Slight uptick in consumer perception of the jobs market on the healthy bounce 
in Conference Board confidence.pic.twitter.com/GAe1N6XSQM 
<https://t.co/GAe1N6XSQM>
 <https://twitter.com/bespokeinvest/status/747793538897829888> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bespokeinvest/status/747793538897829888> 
But there was a weaker manufacturing survey from the Richmond Federal Reserve:
Richmond Fed (@RichmondFed) 
#Manufacturing <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Manufacturing?src=hash> activity 
in our region weakened in June, our new survey found. New orders and shipments 
declined.https://t.co/FcIsZF6ln1 <https://t.co/FcIsZF6ln1>
 <https://twitter.com/RichmondFed/status/747793011078238208> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RichmondFed/status/747793011078238208> 
Updated at 3.37pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728448e4b0cea1d7b04b45%23block-57728448e4b0cea1d7b04b45>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728448e4b0cea1d7b04b45%23block-57728448e4b0cea1d7b04b45>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728448e4b0cea1d7b04b45%23block-57728448e4b0cea1d7b04b45&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728448e4b0cea1d7b04b45%23block-57728448e4b0cea1d7b04b45>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728448e4b0cea1d7b04b45%23block-57728448e4b0cea1d7b04b45>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728448e4b0cea1d7b04b45%23block-57728448e4b0cea1d7b04b45&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.03pm BST 15:03  <> 

Earlier UK chancellor George Osborne suggested taxes would have to go up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/28/brexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live?page=with:block-57723331e4b030d83eb4af74#block-57723331e4b030d83eb4af74>
 to address the economic damage caused by Brexit.

So what taxes would they be? VAT could be one, according to tax specialists at 
Eversheds. The law firms partner Ben Jones said:

If tax rises are required, ironically VAT (the only real European tax and a 
prerequisite for EU membership) could be the tax most likely to increase. VAT 
is a huge source of tax revenue and relatively easy to increase, both 
practically and politically. Indeed, during the financial crisis of 2008 and 
after, VAT was increased from 17.5% to 20% as part of measures to tackle the 
fiscal deficit. Increases to income taxes, national insurance contributions or 
business taxes would most likely be far more publically unpopular and 
politically undesirable.
 VAT could rise Photograph: stocknshares/Getty Images Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-577281cce4b0121e39336afe%23block-577281cce4b0121e39336afe>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-577281cce4b0121e39336afe%23block-577281cce4b0121e39336afe>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-577281cce4b0121e39336afe%23block-577281cce4b0121e39336afe&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-577281cce4b0121e39336afe%23block-577281cce4b0121e39336afe>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-577281cce4b0121e39336afe%23block-577281cce4b0121e39336afe>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-577281cce4b0121e39336afe%23block-577281cce4b0121e39336afe&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.48pm BST 14:48  <> 

And here’s the Greek prime minister on the lesson from Brexit as he arrives at 
the European Council:
Jennifer Rankin (@JenniferMerode) 
Alexis Tsipras: hopes #Brexit <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Brexit?src=hash> 
will be wake up call for the rest of Europe.. Emergency initiatives to replace 
austerity with growth.
 <https://twitter.com/JenniferMerode/status/747787939791380480> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JenniferMerode/status/747787939791380480> 
Updated at 3.44pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728021e4b0565db417b86e%23block-57728021e4b0565db417b86e>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728021e4b0565db417b86e%23block-57728021e4b0565db417b86e>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728021e4b0565db417b86e%23block-57728021e4b0565db417b86e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728021e4b0565db417b86e%23block-57728021e4b0565db417b86e>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728021e4b0565db417b86e%23block-57728021e4b0565db417b86e>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57728021e4b0565db417b86e%23block-57728021e4b0565db417b86e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.45pm BST 14:45  <> 

Back with the European parliament:
Mathias Schindler (@presroi) 
Today, the European Parliament called on UK to invoke Article 50 TEU as soon 
as possible. Read the adopted version:pic.twitter.com/lifoMxlENy 
<https://t.co/lifoMxlENy>
 <https://twitter.com/presroi/status/747760537510027265> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/presroi/status/747760537510027265> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727f61e4b0cea1d7b04b14%23block-57727f61e4b0cea1d7b04b14>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727f61e4b0cea1d7b04b14%23block-57727f61e4b0cea1d7b04b14>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727f61e4b0cea1d7b04b14%23block-57727f61e4b0cea1d7b04b14&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727f61e4b0cea1d7b04b14%23block-57727f61e4b0cea1d7b04b14>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727f61e4b0cea1d7b04b14%23block-57727f61e4b0cea1d7b04b14>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727f61e4b0cea1d7b04b14%23block-57727f61e4b0cea1d7b04b14&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.36pm BST 14:36  <> 

Wall Street opens sharply higher

In tandem with other global markets, which have recovered a small part of the 
hefty declines seen in the wake of last week’s Brexit vote, the US has moved 
higher in early trading.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average - down almost 900 points since the referendum 
outcome - has gained 144 points or 0.8% as bargain hunters dip their toes into 
the market. The S&P 500 has opened up 0.7% and Nasdaq 1.1%.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727be7e4b0121e39336acf%23block-57727be7e4b0121e39336acf>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727be7e4b0121e39336acf%23block-57727be7e4b0121e39336acf>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727be7e4b0121e39336acf%23block-57727be7e4b0121e39336acf&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727be7e4b0121e39336acf%23block-57727be7e4b0121e39336acf>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727be7e4b0121e39336acf%23block-57727be7e4b0121e39336acf>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727be7e4b0121e39336acf%23block-57727be7e4b0121e39336acf&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.30pm BST 14:30  <> 

Rob Davies

Representatives of several industries are due to meet business minister Sajid 
Javid MP this afternoon for a summit on the potential impact of the Brexit vote 
on UK firms, writes Rob Davies.

Food and Drink Federation director general Ian Wright will warn Javid that the 
industry faces a huge staffing shortfall if EU citizens are blocked from 
working in the UK.

“The UK food industry has almost 100,000 workers from the rest of the EU. We 
have an emerging gap of up to a further 130,000 workers as our ageing staff 
retire over the next decade,” he said in a prepared statement.

“While we as an industry continue to take many steps to develop home-grown 
talent through ambitious graduate and apprenticeship programmes, EU workers 
also provide a highly valued solution to our skills gap.

 “The UK food industry benefits from bringing in skilled labour from the EU 
and we urgently need assurances from UK Government that EU nationals working in 
the UK will be granted leave to remain. UK Government must now develop a new 
migration policy that ensures food and drink manufacturers have continued 
access to the workers we will need to address a looming skills gap and the 
drive for future innovation to support our UK competitive advantage.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727b44e4b0565db417b841%23block-57727b44e4b0565db417b841>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727b44e4b0565db417b841%23block-57727b44e4b0565db417b841>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727b44e4b0565db417b841%23block-57727b44e4b0565db417b841&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727b44e4b0565db417b841%23block-57727b44e4b0565db417b841>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727b44e4b0565db417b841%23block-57727b44e4b0565db417b841>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57727b44e4b0565db417b841%23block-57727b44e4b0565db417b841&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.22pm BST 14:22  <> 

Here’s a video of Richard Branson discussing his Brexit concerns on Good 
Morning Britain:
Richard Branson: Virgin Group lost a third of value since Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/jun/28/richard-branson-virgin-group-lost-a-third-of-value-since-brexit-vote-video>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772782be4b0121e39336ab1%23block-5772782be4b0121e39336ab1>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772782be4b0121e39336ab1%23block-5772782be4b0121e39336ab1>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772782be4b0121e39336ab1%23block-5772782be4b0121e39336ab1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772782be4b0121e39336ab1%23block-5772782be4b0121e39336ab1>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20and%20shares%20rally%20after%20two%20days%20of%20record%20Brexit%20losses%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772782be4b0121e39336ab1%23block-5772782be4b0121e39336ab1>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fbrexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5772782be4b0121e39336ab1%23block-5772782be4b0121e39336ab1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
The volatility suffered by stock markets in recent days is unlikely to ease in 
the near future. The day saw a rebound following the sharp declines which came 
in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote, but the City is reluctant to bet 
too strongly on where markets go from here. Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at 
Hargreaves Lansdown, said:

It would be premature to call the bottom of the market, prices are still 
adjusting to the post-Brexit world, and it would be foolhardy to rule out 
further price swings.

The bounce in the Footsie does show there are buyers out there who are 
swooping in when prices fall sufficiently, but markets neither go up, or down, 
in a straight line, and things may yet have to get worse before they get better.

Valuations on the UK stock market look in the middle of their historical 
range, which suggests it’s a reasonable time to put money in the market if you 
are a long term investor. But given the current volatility, you need to be 
willing to stomach further price falls, if you are dipping a toe in.

The final scores showed:

 * The FTSE 100 finished up 2.64% or 158.19 points at 6140.39 
 * Germany’s Dax added 1.93% to 9447.28 
 * France’s Cac closed 2.61% higher at 4088.85 
 * Italy’s FTSE MIB rose 3.3% to 15601.62 
 * Spain’s Ibex ended up 2.48% at 7835.0 
 * In Greece, the Athens market added 3.72% to 538.65 
On Wall Street, the Dow Jones Industrial Average is currently up 148 points or 
0.87%.

As for the pound, it is now up 0.9% at $1.3342 after climbing as high as 
$1.3418. Against the euro it is 0.68% higher at €1.2075.

On that note, it’s time to close up for the day. Thanks for all your comments, 
and we’ll be back tomorrow.
 
ECB president Mario Draghi has said Brexit could reduce European GDP by up to 
0.5 percentage points, according to a document seen by Bloomberg.
Livesquawk (@Livesquawk) 
[BREAKING] #ECB <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ECB?src=hash>'s Draghi sees 
slower growth for the Euro-area over next 3-yrs; could cut growth by 0.5%
 <https://twitter.com/Livesquawk/status/747833125133238272> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Livesquawk/status/747833125133238272> Mohamed A. El-Erian 
(@elerianm) 
Via @Business <https://twitter.com/business> : @ECB <https://twitter.com/ecb> 
President#Draghi <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Draghi?src=hash> suggests that 
#Brexit <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Brexit?src=hash> could reduce #Europe 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Europe?src=hash> #growth 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/growth?src=hash> rate by as much as 0.50 
percentage points.
 <https://twitter.com/elerianm/status/747833477723152384> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/elerianm/status/747833477723152384> Sigma Squawk 
(@SigmaSquawk) 
ECB's Draghi: Brexit recession will affect FX markets
 <https://twitter.com/SigmaSquawk/status/747838115595837441> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SigmaSquawk/status/747838115595837441> Sigma Squawk 
(@SigmaSquawk) 
ECB's Draghi: Concerned Brexit will lead to competitive devaluations
 <https://twitter.com/SigmaSquawk/status/747838096654405632> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SigmaSquawk/status/747838096654405632> Bloomberg TV 
(@BloombergTV) 
JUST IN: Draghi sees #Brexit <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Brexit?src=hash> 
cutting Euro GDP by as much as 0.5%, document showshttps://t.co/H89WE9USD2 
<https://t.co/H89WE9USD2> https://t.co/7x8MPiK8Yf <https://t.co/7x8MPiK8Yf>
 <https://twitter.com/BloombergTV/status/747833571864305664> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BloombergTV/status/747833571864305664>  
Here’s the full Reuters report on the meeting between business leaders and 
government minister Sajid Javid:

Britain appears a long way from developing a clear plan on the country’s 
future trading relationship with the European Union, the head of the 
Confederation of British Industry (CBI) said on Tuesday after a meeting with 
government.

CBI Director-General Carolyn Fairbairn said some firms were putting investment 
on hold after Britain’s vote to leave the EU last week, and that they needed a 
clearer sense of what the government intended to do.

“It’s incredibly early days. I don’t think anybody’s coming out of these 
meetings feeling great, but they are coming out with a sense of resolve,” she 
told reporters.

“We’re a long way off having a plan and leadership and that is still where we 
will be continuing to make (the point) that this is what businesses need,” she 
added.

Fairbairn said businesses expressed very high levels of real and genuine 
concern to business minister Sajid Javid, who had called the meeting, and that 
the government also needed to address the fears of EU migrants employed in 
Britain.
 
At the meeting between business leaders and the government, there were high 
levels of real concern following the Brexit vote according to the CBI.

Reuters reports the CBI saying that the government needed to develop a plan on 
the country’s trading relationship with the EU very quickly. Businesses also 
wanted the government to get on with major infrastructure projects which are 
already underway. There were also concerns about rising prices, housing, and 
the insecurity being felt by migrant workers in the UK.

The CBI director general said a number of firms had put investment on hold, 
said Reuters, and said the meeting did not feel great but there was a sense of 
resolve.
 
After two days of panic leading shares have regained a little of the lost 
ground. Joshua Mahony, market analyst at IG, said:

Today has seen a welcome reprieve from the incessant fear and risk aversion 
that has dominated financial markets since Friday’s unexpected referendum 
result. The question on everyone’s lips is whether we have seen an end to the 
selling, with many seeing current prices as an opportunity to buy their 
favourite firms at a temporary discount. [But] this selloff is unlikely to be 
over and perhaps the only thing that will truly raise risk appetite for good 
will be a faint glimmer of hope that we could see a second referendum.

Despite the binary nature of Friday’s referendum result, far from providing a 
definitive answer to the markets, we now find ourselves in the eye of a 
political and economic storm. We have moved from a position of security and 
stability, to one where we do not even know who will lead the two main 
political parties in a year’s time. David Cameron may have said that there is 
no way to go back on the referendum result, but Jeremy Hunt’s suggestion that 
he would hold a second referendum reminds us that crucially the decision is no 
longer Cameron’s to make.
 
UK business secretary Sajid Javid says maintaining single market access will 
be his number one priority in negotiations with the EU. He says British access 
to the single market may not take the same form as other non-EU countries. He 
says the UK economy remains strong and over the past few days investors have 
reaffirmed their commitment to the UK.
Livesquawk (@Livesquawk) 
Javid says he will lead trade missions this year, will focus on maintaining 
single market access - that will be no.1 priority
 <https://twitter.com/Livesquawk/status/747814781256671232> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Livesquawk/status/747814781256671232> Dept for Business 
(@bisgovuk) 
.@SaijidJavid: Despite the current uncertainty, employer after employer has 
reaffirmed its commitment to the UKpic.twitter.com/E4ua243Psj 
<https://t.co/E4ua243Psj>
 <https://twitter.com/bisgovuk/status/747814928929677312> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bisgovuk/status/747814928929677312> 
Javid also said that a package of support for a potential buyer of the Port 
Talbot steel works was still available.
 
US banks with significant UK operations are likely to act sooner rather than 
later to shift their operations,according to ratings agency Fitch 
<https://www.fitchratings.com/site/pressrelease?id=1008118>. It said:

The UK’s decision to leave the European Union will be disruptive for US global 
banks with significant operations in the UK and will weigh on their 
profitability in the short to medium term, Fitch Ratings says. However, the 
impact is likely to be moderate as we believe they will be able to operate 
through other EU legal entities.

US global banks are likely to start strategically implementing parts of their 
contingency plans rather than wait for trade and service arrangements to be 
agreed. Resolution planning for US global systemically important banks was 
constructive for their Brexit contingency planning because of the requirement 
to rationalize and understand their global legal entity structure and 
activities.


Restructuring operations will depend on license status in various 
jurisdictions, as well as establishing operational scale, potentially 
reallocating capital and relocating where trades and clients are booked. 
Relocation of staff is likely to follow; for example, ahead of the referendum, 
JP Morgan had announced that as many as 4,000 of its UK roles could be shifted 
out of the country.


Management will have to decide where to focus its European operations, 
depending on language requirements, staff expertise and incentives offered by 
these countries. Flexible labor laws will be important for US firms, so this 
may favor countries like Ireland and the Netherlands, rather than Germany and 
France.

 
After cutting the UK’s credit rating from AAA to AA, Standard & Poor’s has 
said it had no plans to downgrade any other EU country in the wake of the 
Brexit vote.

But it said it would decide whether any UK bank ratings should be cut in the 
coming weeks. Reuters reports 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-britain-ratings-s-p-banks-idUSKCN0ZE1PQ?feedType=RSS&feedName=businessNews&utm_source=Twitter&utm_medium=Social&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+reuters%2FbusinessNews+%28Business+News%29>
:

“This does not lead to mechanical changes (in bank ratings),” S&P banking 
sector analyst Giles Edwards said on a webcast.

“But equally this (Brexit scenario) was not our base case... where we see a 
need to change ratings we will do so in the coming weeks.”

On other EU sovereign ratings, S&P’s global sovereign chief Moritz Kraemer 
said: “We have no intention of downgrading any other EU sovereign.”

S&P chopped the UK’s credit rating by two notches to AA and kept it on a 
‘negative outlook’ on Monday in the wake of last week’s vote to leave the 
European Union. It was the first time it had ever made such a deep cut to a 
top-rated sovereign.
 
Here’s a link to video of Greek prime minister Alexis Tsipras arriving earlier 
at the European Council, warning the Brexit vote was a wake up call for Europe:
EU Council TV News (@EUCouncilTVNews) 
#EUCO <https://twitter.com/hashtag/EUCO?src=hash> Arrival and doorstep #Tsipras
 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Tsipras?src=hash> #GR 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GR?src=hash> @tsipras_eu 
<https://twitter.com/tsipras_eu> on #UKReferendum 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/UKReferendum?src=hash> #EUReferendum 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/EUReferendum?src=hash> #UKinEU 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/UKinEU?src=hash> https://t.co/VEJhWHLFiH 
<https://t.co/VEJhWHLFiH>
 <https://twitter.com/EUCouncilTVNews/status/747801941795831808> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/EUCouncilTVNews/status/747801941795831808> Alexis Tsipras 
(@tsipras_eu) 
Europe has reached a predictable crisis because of the democratic deficit, the 
absence of soc. cohesion & solidarityhttps://t.co/h1A2YKUIbb 
<https://t.co/h1A2YKUIbb>
 <https://twitter.com/tsipras_eu/status/747803912095268864> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/tsipras_eu/status/747803912095268864>  
More Brexit fallout. Siemens is putting new wind power investment plans in the 
UK on hold due to uncertainty caused by last week’s Brexit vote, theGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> energy company has told the 
Guardian. Arthur Neslen reports:

A £310m manufacturing hub in Hull that employs 1,000 people 
<http://www.rechargenews.com/wind/1435902/analysis-siemens-and-davey-fear-brexit-fall-out-for-uk-offshore-wind>
 will not be affected by the decision, and should still begin producing blades 
and assembling turbines next year.

But Siemens <https://www.theguardian.com/business/siemens>, one of the few 
firms to openly back a Remain vote, will not be making new investments until 
the future of the UK’s relationship with Europe becomes clearer.

Juergen Maier, the firm’s UK CEO, said that an existing blueprint to export 
offshore wind turbine machinery from the Hull hub was now up in the air.

Sign up to our EU referendum morning briefing <> Read more 

 He said: “Those plans were only beginning to happen and I expect that they 
will stall until we can work out exactly what the [new government’s] plan is, 
how we can participate in EU research programmes, and until all the issues 
around tariffs and trade have been sorted out.”

The full report is here:

Siemens freezes new UK wind power investment following Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/28/siemens-freezes-new-uk-wind-power-investment-following-brexit-vote>

 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sign-up>
 
After higher than forecast US GDP figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/28/brexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live?page=with:block-57726df9e4b0aa06a3325b56#block-57726df9e4b0aa06a3325b56>
, comes a better than expected consumer confidence number.

According to the conference board, the consumer confidence index came in at 98 
in June, compared to 92.4 in the previous month and an expected 93.3. (This was 
before the outcome of the UK referendum of course.)
Bespoke (@bespokeinvest) 
Slight uptick in consumer perception of the jobs market on the healthy bounce 
in Conference Board confidence.pic.twitter.com/GAe1N6XSQM 
<https://t.co/GAe1N6XSQM>
 <https://twitter.com/bespokeinvest/status/747793538897829888> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bespokeinvest/status/747793538897829888> 
But there was a weaker manufacturing survey from the Richmond Federal Reserve:
Richmond Fed (@RichmondFed) 
#Manufacturing <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Manufacturing?src=hash> activity 
in our region weakened in June, our new survey found. New orders and shipments 
declined.https://t.co/FcIsZF6ln1 <https://t.co/FcIsZF6ln1>
 <https://twitter.com/RichmondFed/status/747793011078238208> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RichmondFed/status/747793011078238208>  
Earlier UK chancellor George Osborne suggested taxes would have to go up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/28/brexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live?page=with:block-57723331e4b030d83eb4af74#block-57723331e4b030d83eb4af74>
 to address the economic damage caused by Brexit.

So what taxes would they be? VAT could be one, according to tax specialists at 
Eversheds. The law firms partner Ben Jones said:

If tax rises are required, ironically VAT (the only real European tax and a 
prerequisite for EU membership) could be the tax most likely to increase. VAT 
is a huge source of tax revenue and relatively easy to increase, both 
practically and politically. Indeed, during the financial crisis of 2008 and 
after, VAT was increased from 17.5% to 20% as part of measures to tackle the 
fiscal deficit. Increases to income taxes, national insurance contributions or 
business taxes would most likely be far more publically unpopular and 
politically undesirable.
 VAT could rise Photograph: stocknshares/Getty Images  
And here’s the Greek prime minister on the lesson from Brexit as he arrives at 
the European Council:
Jennifer Rankin (@JenniferMerode) 
Alexis Tsipras: hopes #Brexit <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Brexit?src=hash> 
will be wake up call for the rest of Europe.. Emergency initiatives to replace 
austerity with growth.
 <https://twitter.com/JenniferMerode/status/747787939791380480> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JenniferMerode/status/747787939791380480>  
Back with the European parliament:
Mathias Schindler (@presroi) 
Today, the European Parliament called on UK to invoke Article 50 TEU as soon 
as possible. Read the adopted version:pic.twitter.com/lifoMxlENy 
<https://t.co/lifoMxlENy>
 <https://twitter.com/presroi/status/747760537510027265> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/presroi/status/747760537510027265>  
In tandem with other global markets, which have recovered a small part of the 
hefty declines seen in the wake of last week’s Brexit vote, the US has moved 
higher in early trading.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average - down almost 900 points since the referendum 
outcome - has gained 144 points or 0.8% as bargain hunters dip their toes into 
the market. The S&P 500 has opened up 0.7% and Nasdaq 1.1%.
 
Representatives of several industries are due to meet business minister Sajid 
Javid MP this afternoon for a summit on the potential impact of the Brexit vote 
on UK firms, writes Rob Davies.

Food and Drink Federation director general Ian Wright will warn Javid that the 
industry faces a huge staffing shortfall if EU citizens are blocked from 
working in the UK.

“The UK food industry has almost 100,000 workers from the rest of the EU. We 
have an emerging gap of up to a further 130,000 workers as our ageing staff 
retire over the next decade,” he said in a prepared statement.

“While we as an industry continue to take many steps to develop home-grown 
talent through ambitious graduate and apprenticeship programmes, EU workers 
also provide a highly valued solution to our skills gap.

 “The UK food industry benefits from bringing in skilled labour from the EU 
and we urgently need assurances from UK Government that EU nationals working in 
the UK will be granted leave to remain. UK Government must now develop a new 
migration policy that ensures food and drink manufacturers have continued 
access to the workers we will need to address a looming skills gap and the 
drive for future innovation to support our UK competitive advantage.”
 
Here’s a video of Richard Branson discussing his Brexit concerns on Good 
Morning Britain:
Richard Branson: Virgin Group lost a third of value since Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/jun/28/richard-branson-virgin-group-lost-a-third-of-value-since-brexit-vote-video> 